Highlights
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning for Heterogeneous Multi-Robot Task Assignment Under
Distribution Shifts
Daniel Garces, Sara Castro, Adrian Haimovich, Byron Crowe, Stephanie Gil
• Online task assignment for heterogeneous robots with service windows.
• Prediction-aware rollout uses future requests without committing to them.
• Adaptive weights reduce the impact of unreliable demand forecasts.
• Selective re-optimization revises assigned but unstarted requests.
• Hospital case study shows lower wait times and near-complete service.
arXiv:2608.21554v1  [cs.RO]  21 Aug 2026


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning for Heterogeneous Multi-Robot
Task Assignment Under Distribution Shifts
Daniel Garcesa,∗, Sara Castrob, Adrian Haimovichb,c, Byron Crowed and Stephanie Gila
aJohn A. Paulson School Of Engineering And Applied Sciences, Harvard University, 150 Western Avenue, Boston, 02134, MA, USA
bHarvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, 02215, MA, USA
cBeth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, 02215, MA, USA
dStanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Drive, Stanford, 94305, CA, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Heterogeneous Task Allocation
Multi-Agent Model-Based Reinforce-
ment Learning
Sequential Decision Making
Planning Under Uncertainty
Online Route Optimization
Event Prediction
Autonomous Robots
A B S T R A C T
Heterogeneous multi-robot service systems must assign requests to compatible robots, construct
feasible schedules, and adapt as new tasks arrive online. Historical data can help anticipate future
demand, but relying too heavily on inaccurate predictions can degrade performance under distribution
shifts. We develop a prediction-aware adaptive rollout framework for heterogeneous multi-robot task
assignment with scheduled and real-time requests. The problem is formulated as a finite-horizon
stochastic dynamic program incorporating robot-task compatibility, ordered service requirements,
routing constraints, service windows, and end-of-horizon return requirements. The proposed policy
evaluates current assignments using sampled future request scenarios while restricting immediate
commitments to requests already observed. To enable online use, the framework combines pruned can-
didate controls, wait actions, and an interaction-aware base policy for efficient future-cost estimation.
Robustness to forecast error is provided by adaptively reweighting predicted requests based on recent
prediction mismatch and selectively re-optimizing assigned but unstarted requests. We also introduce a
historical-data-driven procedure for selecting the heterogeneous fleet composition before deployment.
In a case study using real nursing-task requests from hospital inpatient floors, the proposed approach
achieves near-complete service and reduces serviced-request wait times relative to reactive, token-
passing, prediction-positioning, and myopic greedy baselines, with the largest improvements in tail-
delay metrics.
1. Introduction
Autonomous robot teams are increasingly being de-
ployed in service environments where spatially distributed
requests must be completed under timing, routing, and
compatibility constraints. Examples include monitoring and
maintenance [75, 114, 15, 95], warehouse and logistics
operations [39, 92], last-mile delivery and transportation
services [64, 84, 50, 17, 44, 78, 86, 48], UAV resupply
and freight management [2, 102], and service coordination
during emergency or pandemic responses [32]. In these
settings, robot teams rarely execute a fixed set of tasks known
completely in advance. Instead, they must repeatedly adapt
assignments and schedules as new requests arrive, robot
availability changes, and operating conditions deviate from
historical expectations.
This paper studies online task assignment and schedul-
ing for heterogeneous multi-robot teams operating over a
finite horizon. The team must serve both scheduled requests,
known before execution, and real-time requests, revealed
sequentially during operation. Requests may require ordered
visits to one or more service locations and must satisfy
timing, routing, and compatibility constraints. Robots may
differ in their service capabilities, travel times, operational
status, and maintenance requirements. The resulting plan-
ning problem is to assign observed requests to robots while
∗Corresponding author
dgarces@g.harvard.edu (D. Garces)
ORCID(s): 0000-0002-4161-0265 (D. Garces)
preserving enough scheduling flexibility to respond effec-
tively to uncertain future demand.
A key challenge is that online assignment decisions
have delayed consequences. Assigning a robot to a cur-
rently observed request changes the robot’s future location,
availability, and ability to serve requests that may arrive
later. Predictive models can help by using historical data
to generate possible future request scenarios, allowing the
planner to estimate the opportunity cost of current commit-
ments. However, operating conditions may change during
deployment: the number, timing, location, or type of real-
time requests may differ from the historical patterns used
to generate predictions. When this occurs, a planner that
continues to rely heavily on inaccurate forecasts may reserve
robots unnecessarily, delay urgent observed requests, or
overcommit resources to schedules that are poorly matched
to the demand actually being realized. This paper addresses
the question of how an online heterogeneous multi-robot
planner should use predictive demand information when that
information is useful on average but may become unreliable
during operation.
Existing approaches only partially address this issue.
Reactive online assignment methods [96, 52, 113, 26, 8, 7,
31, 100, 45] can respond to newly observed requests, but they
are typically myopic and do not explicitly reason about the
future consequences of current commitments. Prediction-
based methods [99, 34, 80, 90, 109, 25] can anticipate likely
future demand, but they often lack mechanisms for adjust-
ing the influence of predictions when recent observations
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
indicate forecast mismatch. Offline deterministic scheduling
methods [60, 115, 98] assume that the relevant requests are
known in advance, while exact stochastic dynamic program-
ming formulations [10, 58] are computationally intractable
for the heterogeneous online setting considered here if no
approximations are used. These limitations motivate an ap-
proximate online planning method that can use lookahead
to anticipate future demand when predictions are reliable,
reduce the influence of predictions when recent observa-
tions indicate forecast mismatch, and avoid overcommitting
robots when future demand remains uncertain.
Rollout-based lookahead [11, 12] provides a natural
way to construct such an approximation. Because current
assignments affect future robot availability, sampled future
request scenarios can be used to estimate the opportunity
cost of assigning a robot to a currently observed request,
and candidate decisions can be compared according to their
immediate and simulated future costs. However, deploying
rollout in this setting introduces significant computational
challenges. Each candidate decision is itself a schedule up-
date: the planner must decide not only which robot should
serve each known request, but also where that request should
be inserted in the robot’s route and when each service should
occur. As a result, the feasible schedule space grows com-
binatorially with the number of robots, requests, compati-
bility relations, and insertion positions, making exhaustive
action enumeration impractical. In addition, each candidate
schedule must be evaluated by simulating future decisions
across sampled request scenarios. These simulations must
be efficient enough to run repeatedly online, yet detailed
enough to preserve the dominant interactions among robot
compatibility, graph-based routing, service timing, and robot
availability. Beyond the rollout computation itself, the use-
fulness of these simulated policies also depends on the initial
heterogeneous robot composition: if the team lacks sufficient
compatible capacity for bottleneck request types, then even
an effective online scheduling policy may be unable to
maintain feasible service.
Accurate future-cost estimation is also difficult because
the request scenarios used in rollout are only approxima-
tions of future operating conditions. Predictions generated
from historical data may be informative on average, but
the realized number, timing, location, or type of real-time
requests can change during deployment. When this occurs,
simulated future costs based on outdated or inaccurate fore-
casts may misrepresent the true opportunity cost of current
assignments. Moreover, forecast errors may have already
influenced the current schedule before they are detected. For
this reason, future-cost estimates should reflect the planner’s
current confidence in the predicted request scenarios, rather
than treating all predictions as equally reliable throughout
the operating horizon. The planner must also be able to
revise unexecuted assignments when new observations in-
dicate that the current schedule was shaped by unreliable
forecasts, while preserving commitments to services that
have already begun.
We address these challenges with a prediction-aware
adaptive rollout framework for heterogeneous multi-robot
task assignment and scheduling. The central idea is to treat
predictions as uncertain evidence whose influence should
vary over time, rather than as fixed information that should
be trusted uniformly throughout the operating horizon. At
each decision time, sampled future request scenarios are
used to estimate the downstream cost of candidate schedul-
ing decisions. Their contribution to these estimates is mod-
ulated by confidence weights derived from recent discrep-
ancies between predicted and observed demand. In this
way, the planner can use predictions to make anticipatory
decisions when they are informative, while reducing their
influence when realized operating conditions suggest that the
forecast is unreliable.
The framework combines this adaptive use of predictions
with computational mechanisms needed for online deploy-
ment. A pruned action-generation procedure constructs a
tractable set of candidate schedule modifications instead
of enumerating the full feasible schedule space. Explicit
wait actions allow the planner to preserve robot capac-
ity when committing immediately to an observed request
may be undesirable under uncertain future demand. An
interaction-aware base policy is used inside rollout simu-
lations to approximate future assignment and routing deci-
sions efficiently while preserving the main coupling effects
among timing, routing, compatibility, and robot availability.
A selective re-optimization mechanism can return eligible
assigned but unstarted requests to the pending set when new
observations indicate that the current schedule has become
undesirable, while already-started services remain fixed. As
a supporting pre-deployment component, we also develop
a historical-data-driven fleet-sizing procedure that selects
an initial heterogeneous robot composition for which the
assignment routines achieve a target empirical feasibility
level on representative operating days.
An overview of the proposed adaptive rollout method
is shown in Figure 1. The framework integrates prediction,
adaptive forecast reweighting, selective re-optimization, and
rollout-based schedule evaluation. Together, these compo-
nents produce an online planner that is anticipatory when
predictions are useful, adaptive when operating conditions
change, computationally tractable for repeated online deci-
sions, and less prone to overcommitting robot capacity when
future demand is uncertain.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. We formulate online heterogeneous multi-robot task
assignment and scheduling with scheduled and real-
time requests as a finite-horizon stochastic dynamic
program that captures robot-request compatibility, or-
dered service requirements, timing constraints, graph-
based routing, and end-of-horizon feasibility.
2. We develop a prediction-aware adaptive rollout frame-
work for online scheduling under uncertain demand.
The framework uses sampled future request scenar-
ios to estimate the opportunity cost of current deci-
sions, dynamically adjusts their influence based on
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed prediction-aware adaptive rollout framework for heterogeneous multi-robot task assignment.
Local temporal point process models generate sampled future request scenarios, which are filtered to remove requests that are
already observed or scheduled. Recent forecast errors are used to dynamically reweight predicted requests, producing context-
dependent prediction-confidence scores and weighted future-cost estimates. Newly observed urgent requests can trigger re-
optimization by returning eligible assigned but unstarted requests to the pending set. The rollout-based assignment module
evaluates candidate assignments for observed and re-optimized requests using the weighted future-cost estimates and selects
schedules for the heterogeneous robot team.
recent forecast accuracy, and selectively re-optimizes
assigned but unstarted requests when operating con-
ditions deviate from predictions. Pruned action gener-
ation, explicit wait actions, and an interaction-aware
base policy make the resulting rollout computation
practical for repeated online use.
3. We develop a historical-data-driven fleet-sizing pro-
cedure for selecting an initial heterogeneous robot
composition that achieves a target empirical feasibility
level on representative operating days while account-
ing for robot-request compatibility and bottleneck ser-
vice requirements.
4. We evaluate the framework using real nursing-task
requests from hospital inpatient floors at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center. Compared with reactive
dispatching, token-passing, prediction-positioning, and
myopic greedy baselines, the proposed method achieves
near-complete service while reducing both average
and upper-tail request waiting times. Ablation studies
further demonstrate the complementary roles of adap-
tive prediction reweighting and selective re-optimization.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 reviews related work on heterogeneous online task
allocation, fleet sizing, request-sequence prediction, rollout-
based replanning, and robustness under distribution shift.
Section 3 presents the stochastic dynamic programming for-
mulation. Section 4 introduces the prediction-aware adaptive
rollout framework and the historical-data-driven fleet-sizing
procedure. Section 5 presents the case study and empirical
results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses
limitations and future directions.
2. Related Work
This work lies at the intersection of heterogeneous multi-
robot task allocation, online scheduling under uncertain
demand, request-sequence prediction, and robust planning
under forecast mismatch. Prior work has developed ex-
pressive models for heterogeneous robot coordination, scal-
able online allocation mechanisms, predictive models for
irregular event sequences, and robustness techniques for
model-based decision-making. However, these components
are often studied separately. Many online allocation methods
react to observed requests but do not explicitly reason about
the downstream opportunity cost of current commitments.
Prediction-aware methods can anticipate future demand, but
often assume that forecasts remain reliable during deploy-
ment. Robust planning methods account for uncertainty,
but typically do not specify how concrete sampled future
requests should be weighted inside an online heterogeneous
scheduling policy. Our work addresses this gap by inte-
grating future-request prediction into a rollout-based online
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
planner, adapting the influence of predicted requests using
recent forecast errors, and supporting the planner with a
historical-data-driven procedure for selecting an initial het-
erogeneous fleet composition.
2.1. Heterogeneous Online Task Allocation,
Scheduling, and Fleet Composition
Multi-robot task allocation has been studied through
combinatorial optimization, task-and-motion planning, market-
based coordination, decentralized algorithms, learning-based
policies, and uncertainty-aware planning. These approaches
differ in how they model robot heterogeneity, temporal
constraints, routing constraints, and online task arrivals. The
setting considered in this paper combines several of these
difficulties: robots have type-dependent capabilities and
travel times, requests have service windows and ordered end-
point sequences, and new real-time requests arrive during
execution. The resulting online scheduling problem requires
decisions that are computationally tractable, compatible
with heterogeneous robot capabilities, and sensitive to future
fleet availability.
A first line of work develops expressive models for het-
erogeneous allocation, scheduling, and integrated task-and-
motion planning. Complexity-theoretic results show that
multi-robot task allocation is difficult in general [6], and
dynamic variants remain challenging when tasks must be in-
serted, deleted, or rescheduled under heterogeneous capabil-
ities and temporal constraints [73, 14]. Integrated task-and-
motion planning methods further couple assignment with
sequencing, routing, energy constraints, coalition formation,
or learned subteam performance [24, 74, 73, 76, 16, 69,
4, 37, 9]. These methods provide high modeling fidelity,
but repeatedly solving detailed coupled planning problems
can be impractical in service settings where requests arrive
continuously and schedules must be revised frequently.
A second line of work emphasizes scalability and re-
sponsiveness through heuristic, auction-based, market-based,
decentralized, or metaheuristic mechanisms [96, 52, 113,
26, 8, 7, 31, 100, 45]. These methods can often respond
quickly to newly observed tasks without solving a large
centralized optimization problem. However, purely reactive
allocation can be myopic when current assignments affect
future service quality. For example, assigning a scarce
compatible robot to a low-urgency request may prevent
that robot from serving a more urgent request that is likely
to arrive later. Our framework addresses this limitation
by using sampled future request scenarios to estimate the
downstream opportunity cost of current commitments, while
still restricting executable assignments to requests that have
actually entered the system.
Learning-based allocation methods provide another route
to fast online decision-making. Recent work has explored
graph neural network schedulers [99], imitation-learning-
based collaborative schedulers [34], reinforcement learning
for cooperative task allocation [80, 90, 109, 25], and LLM-
based planning or coordination frameworks [23, 56, 46, 38,
107]. These approaches can amortize computation through
offline training and produce rapid decisions during deploy-
ment. However, learned allocation policies can degrade
when request arrival patterns, task frequencies, robot avail-
ability, travel conditions, or operating policies shift away
from the training distribution. In contrast, our approach does
not require retraining the allocation policy when prediction
quality changes. Instead, it adjusts the planning objective
online by reducing the influence of predicted future requests
when recent observations indicate forecast mismatch.
Several works incorporate uncertainty directly into het-
erogeneous allocation, including robust schedules under un-
certain robot capabilities [33], stochastic trait models with
probabilistic task satisfaction [81], hindsight optimization
for uncertain task outcomes [27], and proactive allocation
under spatiotemporal uncertainty [93]. These methods show
the importance of modeling uncertainty in robot capabilities,
task outcomes, and future demand. Our focus is complemen-
tary: we consider uncertainty in the future request stream
and, more specifically, in the reliability of the predictive dis-
tribution used by the online planner. While prior uncertainty-
aware allocation methods often model uncertainty in the
planning problem itself, they do not typically adapt the in-
fluence of predicted future requests based on forecast errors
observed during deployment. Our method addresses this gap
by estimating prediction reliability online and using it to
reweight predicted demand during rollout-based replanning.
The effectiveness of an online assignment policy also
depends on the initial heterogeneous robot composition.
In heterogeneous service systems, adding robots does not
necessarily increase capacity for all requests: a fleet may
still fail if it lacks robots compatible with bottleneck request
types. Many allocation and scheduling approaches assume
that the robot team is fixed before planning begins, while
related work on team formation, coalition selection, and sub-
team performance typically decides which available robots
should cooperate on tasks during execution [74, 73, 37, 9].
These problems are distinct from selecting the initial fleet
composition before deployment, where the goal is to ensure
that the online assignment policy has sufficient compatible
capacity for the demand patterns it is likely to encounter.
Our work treats initial heterogeneous fleet sizing as a sup-
porting design decision for online scheduling. We develop
a historical-data-driven procedure that evaluates candidate
fleet compositions on representative operating days and se-
lects a composition for which the assignment routines used
in simulation achieve a target empirical feasibility level.
2.2. Request-Sequence Prediction and Scenario
Generation
Future service demand in online task-allocation prob-
lems can be represented as an irregular sequence of marked
events. Each event has an arrival time and a mark encoding
task-relevant information such as service type, location,
priority, workload, or task family. Temporal point processes
are well suited to this setting because they model event
timing and marks directly, without requiring demand to be
aggregated into fixed time bins. This is useful in sparse
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
or bursty service environments, where discretization can
obscure timing structure or introduce many artificial zero-
count observations [5, 19]. For heterogeneous robot allo-
cation, the mark structure is especially important because
downstream feasibility depends not only on when a request
arrives, but also on which robot types can serve it and which
service locations must be visited.
Recent work has extended temporal point process mod-
els beyond classical formulations by combining continuous-
time event modeling with neural sequence architectures.
Neural marked temporal point processes have been de-
veloped for multivariate and set-valued event data [20],
invertible intensity models improve likelihood evaluation
and sampling for multivariate processes [5], and state-
space point processes combine deep state-space models with
continuous-time marked event dynamics [19]. Transformer-
based event models provide another direction by using
attention mechanisms to model dependencies across event
histories while preserving continuous and discrete event
attributes [28]. These developments are relevant to robot
service systems because they enable predictive models to
condition on irregular request histories and generate hetero-
geneous future request samples.
In our framework, temporal point process predictions are
not used as fixed schedules or mandatory tasks. Instead, the
prediction module generates sampled future request scenar-
ios from an estimated distribution. Each sampled event is
converted into the same request representation used by the
planner, including task type, service-window parameters,
and graph-grounded endpoint sequence. This representation
allows predicted future requests to be evaluated using the
same compatibility, routing, and timing constraints. How-
ever, because deployment demand may differ from the his-
torical data used to train the predictor, the planner must
decide how much influence these sampled requests should
have on current decisions. Our contribution is therefore not
a new temporal point process architecture, but a planning
framework that uses such predictions in a confidence-aware
manner. As real requests are observed, recent forecast errors
are used to update context-dependent prediction weights,
and those weights determine how strongly predicted requests
affect rollout values.
2.3. Robust Planning Under Forecast Error and
Distribution Shift
The value of rollout-based lookahead [11, 12] depends
on the quality of the future request scenarios used in simu-
lation. Predictive models are typically trained on historical
data, but deployment conditions may change because of
shifts in request arrival rates, task mix, robot availabil-
ity, travel times, patient or customer behavior, or operating
policies. In online allocation, this mismatch is especially
consequential because forecast-driven decisions affect future
robot availability and may continue to shape the schedule
even after prediction errors become apparent. If forecast er-
rors persist, repeated replanning can continue to reintroduce
misleading predicted demand unless the planner explicitly
reassesses forecast reliability.
Prior work addresses related issues through multi-step
prediction, self-correction, adaptation, and retraining. Multi-
step prediction and self-correcting dynamics models reduce
error accumulation by training over longer rollouts or expos-
ing models to their own past prediction errors [3, 94]. Other
methods adapt learned models after detecting mismatch be-
tween real and simulated data through feature alignment, in-
stance reweighting, event-triggered updates, or concept-drift
pipelines [89, 42, 112]. These approaches can improve the
predictive model itself, but they may require sufficient post-
shift data and additional computation before the adapted
model becomes useful. Our method instead acts directly
at the planning layer: when recent forecast errors increase,
the rollout objective immediately reduces the influence of
predicted future requests from unreliable contexts.
Other work reduces reliance on model predictions when
uncertainty or error is high. A common strategy is to shorten
the effective model rollout horizon as model accuracy dete-
riorates [43], as in short-horizon model-based reinforcement
learning [40], or to use uncertainty-aware masking schemes
that only use model rollouts when they are sufficiently re-
liable [79]. Related approaches reweight simulated data,
Bellman targets, or rewards according to model quality or
uncertainty [105, 108], with similar ideas appearing in adap-
tive learning and inference-time reweighting [57, 51]. Our
framework shares the principle that unreliable predictions
should have less influence, but differs in how this influence
is applied. Rather than discarding predictions beyond a fixed
horizon or retraining the predictor, we compute context-
dependent confidence weights from observed forecast errors
and use them to continuously modulate predicted-request
costs during rollout.
Distributionally robust optimization and conformal pre-
diction provide more conservative forms of robustness. Dis-
tributionally robust optimization optimizes against a family
of plausible distributions and has been applied to stochastic
control, routing, vehicle balancing, and other risk-sensitive
planning problems [70, 21, 106, 68, 111, 41, 1, 85]. Con-
formal prediction provides calibrated prediction sets or in-
tervals and has been used in robotics, planning, control,
online prediction, and safety assurance [97, 54, 55, 36, 35,
22, 13, 53, 59]. These methods provide principled uncer-
tainty quantification, but they do not directly specify how an
online multi-robot allocation policy should weight concrete
sampled future requests during replanning. Our approach is
operational: it converts recent forecast errors into prediction-
confidence weights that directly affect the rollout value of
candidate scheduling decisions.
Re-optimization provides a complementary mechanism
for robustness. Model predictive control and online allo-
cation methods repeatedly replan as new state information
becomes available, which helps limit the effect of distur-
bances and modeling errors [65]. However, replanning alone
does not necessarily repair assignments that were made
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
when predictions appeared reliable, especially if those as-
signments have not yet started but continue to occupy robot
capacity. Our framework therefore combines adaptive pre-
diction weighting with selective re-optimization of unstarted
assignments. When new observations indicate that the cur-
rent schedule has become undesirable, eligible assigned but
unstarted requests are returned to the pending set and recon-
sidered under the updated state and prediction-confidence
weights. This allows the planner to recover from forecast-
driven allocation errors while preserving commitments to
services that have already begun.
3. Problem Formulation
We consider a heterogeneous multi-robot task-assignment
and scheduling problem over a finite operating horizon.
A fixed robot team must serve scheduled requests known
before execution and real-time requests revealed sequentially
during operation. Each request has a task type, an ordered
sequence of service locations, and timing requirements.
Robots are heterogeneous in their task compatibility, travel
times, operational status, and assigned maintenance stations
/ home stations. The online planning problem is to update
assignments and schedules as new requests arrive so as
to minimize service delay while satisfying compatibility,
routing, timing, and end-of-horizon return constraints.
Future real-time requests are uncertain, and the deploy-
ment request distribution may differ from the historical
distribution used to train the prediction model. We therefore
formulate the online scheduling problem as a finite-horizon
stochastic dynamic program. The robot team composition is
treated as fixed in this formulation; the historical-data-driven
procedure used to select this composition before deployment
is introduced in Section 4.
3.1. Operating Horizon and Environment
We consider one operating day at a time and index the
finite horizon by time steps 𝑡= 0, 1, … , 𝑇, where 𝑇is
the horizon length. A control selected at decision time 𝑡∈
{0, … , 𝑇−1} determines the evolution of the system over
the interval [𝑡, 𝑡+ 1].
The physical environment is represented by a directed
traversal graph = (, ), where is the finite set of
traversable nodes and ⊆× is the set of directed
traversal edges. Each node 𝑣∈corresponds to a collision-
free robot configuration, waypoint, or location in the envi-
ronment. Each edge (𝑣, 𝑣′) ∈corresponds to a physically
realizable local trajectory that moves a robot from node
𝑣to node 𝑣′ without collision. Obstacles and inaccessible
regions are therefore represented implicitly by the absence
of corresponding nodes or edges in .
Only a subset of traversal nodes can appear as request
service locations. We denote this subset by svc
⊆.
Nodes in svc correspond to pickup, drop-off, or task-service
locations. Nodes in ⧵svc are traversal nodes used only for
motion planning and do not accept requests.
Let denote the finite set of robot types. Robot types
represent different robot capabilities with distinct available
actions. For a robot of type 𝑧∈, the time it takes to traverse
an edge (𝑣, 𝑣′) is denoted as 𝜏𝑧(𝑣, 𝑣′) > 0.
3.2. Robot Team and Task Compatibility
The heterogeneous team composition is 𝐌= (𝑀𝑧)𝑧∈,
where 𝑀𝑧is the number of robots of type 𝑧. The total
number of robots is 𝑀= ∑
𝑧∈𝑀𝑧.
The robot identifiers are indexed by = {1, … , 𝑀}.
Each robot 𝓁∈has type 𝑧𝓁∈.
The finite set of task types is denoted by . Robot-task
compatibility is encoded by (𝑧) ⊆, where 𝑘∈(𝑧)
means that a robot of type 𝑧can serve a request of task type
𝑘.
The environment contains a set of maintenance stations
st ⊆. Each robot 𝓁∈is assigned a maintenance station
𝑣st
𝓁∈st. Robots start the horizon at their assigned mainte-
nance stations and must return to their assigned maintenance
stations no later than time 𝑇.
The online planning problem is defined for a fixed team
composition 𝐌.
3.3. Requests
A request 𝑟𝑗is described by
𝑟𝑗=
(
𝑘𝑗, 𝝆𝑗, 𝑡entry
𝑗
, 𝑡start
𝑗
, 𝑡des
𝑗, 𝑡comp
𝑗
)
.
(1)
Here, 𝑘𝑗∈is the task type. Because the completion of a
task may involve a robot visiting a sequence of locations in
a specific order, we model the ordered sequence of service
nodes that must be visited to complete request 𝑟𝑗as
𝝆𝑗=
(
𝜌𝑗,1, 𝜌𝑗,2, … , 𝜌𝑗,𝑛svc
𝑗
)
,
𝜌𝑗,ℎ∈svc,
(2)
The restriction 𝜌𝑗,ℎ∈svc means that requests can only
originate, terminate, or require service at designated service
nodes; other nodes in are used only for traversal.
The time 𝑡entry
𝑗
is the time at which request 𝑟𝑗becomes
known to the system, 𝑡start
𝑗
is the earliest allowable service
start time, 𝑡des
𝑗
is the desired completion time, and 𝑡comp
𝑗
is
the latest allowable completion time. We assume
𝑡entry
𝑗
≤𝑡start
𝑗
≤𝑡des
𝑗
≤𝑡comp
𝑗
≤𝑇.
Each task type 𝑘∈has an execution time 𝐹𝑘. Thus, a
feasible schedule for request 𝑟𝑗must visit the service nodes
in the order specified by 𝝆𝑗, respect the earliest-start time
𝑡start
𝑗
, allocate execution time 𝐹𝑘𝑗, and complete the request
no later than 𝑡comp
𝑗
.
Requests are divided into scheduled and real-time re-
quests. The scheduled request set is
sched =
{
𝑟𝑗∶𝑡entry
𝑗
< 0, 0 ≤𝑡start
𝑗
≤𝑡des
𝑗
≤𝑡comp
𝑗
≤𝑇
}
.
(3)
These requests are known before the operating horizon be-
gins. The real-time request set revealed at time 𝑡is
real
𝑡
=
{
𝑟𝑗∶𝑡entry
𝑗
= 𝑡, 𝑡≤𝑡start
𝑗
≤𝑡des
𝑗
≤𝑡comp
𝑗
≤𝑇
}
.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
(4)
The set of requests known after the arrivals at time 𝑡have
been observed is
𝑡= sched ∪
𝑡⋃
𝜏=0
real
𝜏
.
(5)
3.4. Standing Assumptions
We impose the following assumptions throughout the
paper.
Assumption 1 (Well-formed environment and request pro-
cess). The traversal graph = (, ) and the request
process are well formed in the following sense:
1. The scheduled request set sched is finite, and the
real-time request set real
𝑡
entering the system at each
decision time 𝑡= 0, … , 𝑇−1 is finite.
2. For every ordered pair of service nodes 𝑣, 𝑣′ ∈svc
that may appear as request endpoints, there exists a
directed path 𝑃(𝑣, 𝑣′) = (𝑣0, 𝑣1, … , 𝑣𝐾
) on such
that 𝑣0 = 𝑣, 𝑣𝐾= 𝑣′, (𝑣𝑖, 𝑣𝑖+1) ∈for all 𝑖=
0, … , 𝑁−1, and 𝑣𝑖∉svc for 𝑖= 1, … , 𝑁−1.
Thus, any two request endpoints can be connected
by a traversal path whose internal nodes are not
themselves service locations.
Assumption 2 (Reliable robot execution). Robots execute
assigned motion and service actions without failures. In
particular, if a robot is assigned a feasible schedule, then it
follows the corresponding paths on , performs the required
service actions, and completes them at the planned times.
Thus, uncertainty in the model enters through the real-time
request process rather than through robot failures, localiza-
tion failures, or stochastic task execution.
Assumption 1 ensures that the request process is finite
over the planning horizon and that service locations are not
unavoidable transit bottlenecks in the traversal graph. This
allows a motion planner to connect request endpoints with-
out requiring robots to pass through other service nodes as
intermediate waypoints. Assumption 2 focuses the stochastic
component of the model on future request arrivals, rather
than on failures in robot motion, localization, or task execu-
tion.
3.5. Stochastic Request Process and Distribution
Shift
Let 𝜔𝑡= real
𝑡
denote the random real-time requests
revealed at decision time 𝑡. For notational convenience, let
𝜔𝑇= ∅, so that no new requests enter after the final decision
time. The request sequence for an operating day is =
(𝜔0, 𝜔1, … , 𝜔𝑇), where the last element is deterministic and
empty. The true deployment distribution of is denoted
by ℙ. This distribution governs the number of real-time
requests, their task types, entry times, service windows,
desired completion times, and spatial endpoints.
Historical operating days provide request-sequence sam-
ples that are used to train a predictive model. The model
induces an estimated distribution̂ ℙ, from which sampled
future request scenarios are generated during rollout. We do
not assume that̂ ℙ= ℙ. The mismatch between̂ ℙand ℙ
represents the distribution shift considered in this paper.
3.6. Schedules and Feasible Controls
At time 𝑡, each robot has a current node, operational
status, assignment, and planned schedule. Let 𝑦𝓁
𝑡denote the
planned schedule for robot 𝓁. A schedule specifies the future
traversal nodes and service actions of robot 𝓁from time 𝑡
until its return to its maintenance station.
For a given state 𝑥𝑡, let 𝓁
𝑡(𝑥𝑡) denote the set of feasible
schedules for robot 𝓁. A schedule 𝑦𝓁
𝑡∈𝓁
𝑡(𝑥𝑡) is feasible if
it satisfies the following conditions:
1. it starts from the current node of robot 𝓁at time 𝑡;
2. it follows valid directed paths on the traversal graph ;
3. it assigns only compatible requests to robot 𝓁, mean-
ing 𝑘𝑗∈(𝑧𝓁);
4. it visits the service nodes of each assigned request 𝑟𝑗
in the order specified by 𝝆𝑗;
5. it respects each assigned request’s earliest-start time
and deadline;
6. it preserves the already executed portion of the current
schedule;
7. it does not reassign a request to a different robot after
service has started; and
8. it returns robot 𝓁to its maintenance station 𝑣st
𝓁no later
than time 𝑇.
The joint schedule is 𝐲𝑡= (𝑦1
𝑡, 𝑦2
𝑡, … , 𝑦𝑀
𝑡
). The corre-
sponding feasible joint schedule set is 𝑡(𝑥𝑡) = 1
𝑡(𝑥𝑡)×⋯×
𝑀
𝑡(𝑥𝑡).
A control at time 𝑡is an updated assignment and sched-
ule, 𝑢𝑡
= (𝐚𝑢
𝑡, 𝐲𝑢
𝑡), where 𝑎𝑢
𝑗,𝑡
∈∪{−1, ∅} records
whether each known request 𝑟𝑗
∈𝑡is assigned to a
robot, rejected, or left pending, and 𝐲𝑢
𝑡is the resulting team
schedule. The feasible control set is denoted by 𝑡(𝑥𝑡). Thus,
𝑢𝑡∈𝑡(𝑥𝑡) if the updated assignments and schedules satisfy
the compatibility, routing, time-window, no-reassignment,
and return-to-station constraints described above.
3.7. State Dynamics
The state at time 𝑡, after observing the real-time requests
revealed at time 𝑡, is 𝑥𝑡= (𝐩𝑡, 𝜽𝑡, 𝐲𝑡, 𝐚𝑡, 𝝈𝑡, 𝑡
) . Here, 𝐩𝑡
is the vector of nodes currently occupied by the robots, 𝜽𝑡
is the vector of robot operational statuses, 𝐲𝑡is the current
team schedule, 𝐚𝑡is the current request assignment vector,
𝝈𝑡is the vector of request service statuses, and 𝑡is the set
of requests known by time 𝑡.
For each robot 𝓁the status 𝜃𝓁
𝑡records whether robot
𝓁is available, executing an assigned schedule, or returning
to its maintenance station. For each request 𝑟𝑗∈𝑡, the
assignment status satisfies 𝑎𝑗,𝑡∈∪{−1, ∅}, where 𝑎𝑗,𝑡= 𝓁
means that request 𝑟𝑗is assigned to robot 𝓁, 𝑎𝑗,𝑡= ∅means
that it is known but not currently assigned, and 𝑎𝑗,𝑡= −1
means that it has been rejected. The service status satisfies
𝜎𝑗,𝑡∈{pending, started, completed, rejected}.
(6)
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
After selecting a feasible control 𝑢𝑡, robots execute the
first step of their updated schedules. The system then ob-
serves the next real-time request set 𝜔𝑡+1, and the state
evolves according to 𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝑓𝑡
(𝑥𝑡, 𝑢𝑡, 𝜔𝑡+1
). For notational
convenience, let 𝜔𝑇= ∅. For 𝑡= 0, … , 𝑇−2, the transition
𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝑓𝑡(𝑥𝑡, 𝑢𝑡, 𝜔𝑡+1) incorporates the real-time requests
revealed at the next decision time. At the terminal transition,
𝑥𝑇
= 𝑓𝑇−1(𝑥𝑇−1, 𝑢𝑇−1, 𝜔𝑇) with 𝜔𝑇
= ∅, so no new
requests enter after the final decision time.
3.8. Service Cost and Planning Objective
The planner evaluates assignments according to the ser-
vice delay and feasibility of the resulting schedules. For
a known request 𝑟𝑗∈𝑡that is assigned to a feasible
schedule, let̂ 𝐶𝑗,𝑡(𝑥𝑡) denote its planned completion time
under the current assignment and schedule. The planned
delay of request 𝑟𝑗is ℎ𝑗(𝑥𝑡) = max
{
0,̂ 𝐶𝑗,𝑡(𝑥𝑡) −𝑡des
𝑗
}
.
A known request is said to be still serviceable at state
𝑥𝑡if there exists at least one compatible robot schedule,
consistent with the constraints in 𝑡(𝑥𝑡), that can complete
the request no later than 𝑡comp
𝑗
. Pending serviceable requests
are not assigned the infeasibility penalty, since a wait action
may intentionally leave such requests unassigned to preserve
future capacity.
To compare candidate schedules during online planning,
we use a finite penalized request cost that distinguishes
between assigned requests, pending requests that can still be
served, and requests that have been rejected or have become
infeasible. Let Φ < ∞be a large penalty for rejected or
infeasible requests. Define
𝐻𝑗(𝑥𝑡) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
ℎ𝑗(𝑥𝑡),
if 𝑟𝑗is assigned to a feasible
schedule or completed,
0,
if 𝑟𝑗is pending and can still be
feasibly served,
Φ,
if 𝑟𝑗is rejected or can no longer
be feasibly served.
(7)
Pending serviceable requests incur no immediate cost, but
they remain in the known request set and are evaluated in
subsequent decision times. Any request that is not completed
or assigned to a feasible schedule by the terminal time is
treated as no longer serviceable and receives the penalty Φ.
The aggregate schedule score is
𝐻(𝑥𝑡) =
∑
𝑟𝑗∈𝑡
𝐻𝑗(𝑥𝑡),
(8)
with the convention that 𝐻(𝑥𝑡) = 0 if no request has
entered the system. The penalty Φ is chosen large enough to
discourage rejection or loss of serviceability, while pending
serviceable requests incur no immediate penalty. Thus, a
wait action may intentionally leave a request unassigned
when preserving capacity is valuable, but the request must
eventually be assigned to a feasible schedule or incur the
penalty if it is rejected or becomes no longer serviceable.
The one-step cost is defined as the change in aggregate
schedule score: 𝑔𝑡(𝑥𝑡, 𝑢𝑡, 𝜔𝑡+1) = 𝐻(𝑥𝑡+1) −𝐻(𝑥𝑡), where
𝑥𝑡+1
=
𝑓𝑡(𝑥𝑡, 𝑢𝑡, 𝜔𝑡+1). This incremental cost measures
how the selected assignment and schedule update changes
planned service quality after the next request arrivals are
incorporated.
A policy is a sequence 𝜋= {𝜇0, 𝜇1, … , 𝜇𝑇−1
}, where
each decision rule maps the current state to a feasible con-
trol: 𝜇𝑡(𝑥𝑡) ∈𝑡(𝑥𝑡).
The finite-horizon cost-to-go of policy 𝜋from state 𝑥𝑡is
𝐽𝜋
𝑡(𝑥𝑡) = 𝔼ℙ
[𝑇−1
∑
𝜏=𝑡
𝑔𝜏
(𝑥𝜏, 𝜇𝜏(𝑥𝜏), 𝜔𝜏+1
) ||||||
𝑥𝑡
]
,
(9)
where the expectation is taken over future real-time request
arrivals governed by the deployment distribution ℙ. Because
𝑔𝑡is defined as the change in aggregate schedule score, the
finite-horizon objective evaluates the expected net change
in planned service quality over the horizon. Equivalently,
up to the fixed baseline 𝐻(𝑥𝑡), the objective minimizes the
expected terminal aggregate schedule score.
The ideal planning objective is to find an admissible
policy that minimizes this expected cost-to-go:
𝐽𝜋∗
𝑡(𝑥𝑡) = min
𝜋∈Π 𝐽𝜋
𝑡(𝑥𝑡),
(10)
where Π is the set of admissible policies.
The stochastic dynamic program in (10) provides a for-
mal description of the online planning objective, but it
cannot be solved exactly in the setting considered here. The
control space grows combinatorially because each decision
requires selecting assignments, insertion positions, service
times, and routes for heterogeneous robots. In addition, eval-
uating a candidate control requires reasoning about future
request arrivals whose distribution is only estimated from
historical data and may change during deployment. These
difficulties motivate the prediction-aware adaptive rollout
framework developed in Section 4, which approximates
the feasible control set, estimates downstream cost through
efficient base-policy simulation, adapts the influence of pre-
dicted requests using recent forecast errors, and re-optimizes
eligible unstarted assignments when the current schedule
becomes undesirable.
4. Our Approach
We now develop the prediction-aware adaptive rollout
framework motivated by the stochastic dynamic program
in Section 3. The framework defines an online policỹ 𝜋=̃
𝜇0,̃ 𝜇1, … ,̃ 𝜇𝑇−1, where each decision rule selects a feasible
control from a tractable candidate set,̃ 𝜇𝑡(𝑥𝑡) ∈̃ 𝑡(𝑥𝑡),
wherẽ 𝑡(𝑥𝑡) ⊆𝑡(𝑥𝑡). The candidate set contains schedule
modifications for requests that have actually entered the sys-
tem. Predicted future requests are not eligible for immediate
assignment; they are used only inside rollout simulations to
estimate the downstream cost of current decisions.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
4.1. Overview of the Prediction-Aware Adaptive
Rollout Framework
At each decision time, the online policy combines com-
putationally tractable candidate generation, sampled future
request scenarios, interaction aware base-policy simulation,
adaptive prediction confidence weights, and selective re-
optimization. After newly observed requests have been in-
corporated into the state, the planner may return eligible
assigned but unstarted requests to the pending set when the
current schedule has become undesirable. It then generates
a small set of feasible schedule modifications for currently
pending requests. Each candidate is evaluated by simulating
future decisions over sampled request scenarios from the
estimated distribution̂ ℙ, with predicted requests weighted
according to recent forecast accuracy. The selected control
updates the real robot schedules, while predicted requests
remain hypothetical and influence the decision only through
their weighted contribution to simulated future cost.
The rollout policy is implemented using a one-robot-at-
a-time decision rule. Instead of optimizing over the full joint
control set 𝑡(𝑥𝑡), the planner processes robots sequentially.
When a robot is considered, controls already selected for
earlier robots are held fixed, a robot-local candidate set is
generated, and each local candidate is evaluated by com-
pleting the remaining simulated decisions with an efficient
base policy. This decomposition replaces one large joint
scheduling problem with a sequence of smaller robot-level
rollout decisions, making online evaluation practical while
still accounting for interactions through the simulated state,
service-node reservations, and future-cost base policy.
The online rollout policy is supported by a pre-deployment
fleet-sizing procedure. This procedure uses historical request
sequences to select a heterogeneous robot composition for
which the assignment routines used inside rollout achieve a
target empirical feasibility level on representative operating
days. The resulting composition is then treated as fixed
during online deployment, as assumed in Section 3.
The remainder of this section presents the components
of the framework. Section 4.2 gives the one-robot-at-a-
time rollout decision rule. Section 4.3 describes candidate-
control generation and wait actions. Section 4.4 describes
future-request scenario generation. Section 4.5 introduces
the interaction-aware base policy used for future-cost esti-
mation. Section 4.6 presents adaptive prediction-confidence
weighting. Section 4.7 describes selective re-optimization
of unstarted assignments. Finally, Section 4.8 presents the
supporting historical fleet-sizing procedure.
4.2. One-Robot-at-a-Time Rollout Decision Rule
We first define the online rollout decision rule. The
remaining subsections describe the components used by
this rule: candidate-control generation, future-request sce-
nario generation, the interaction-aware base policy, adaptive
prediction-confidence weights, selective re-optimization,
and the supporting fleet-sizing procedure.
At decision time 𝑡, the planner has observed state 𝑥𝑡
and must select a feasible control from a tractable subset
of the full feasible control set. Directly optimizing over the
joint candidate set for all robots is expensive because a joint
control specifies assignments, insertion positions, service
times, and routes for the entire team. We therefore use a one-
robot-at-a-time rollout scheme, following the one-agent-at-
a-time rollout principle in [11, 12]. This replaces one large
joint optimization with a sequence of smaller robot-local
optimizations, while using simulation to account for the
effect of each local decision on the rest of the team.
Let 𝑡= (𝓁1, 𝓁2, … , 𝓁𝑀) denote the order in which
robots are processed at decision time 𝑡. This order may
be fixed or chosen from the current state, for example by
prioritizing robots that become available earlier. When robot
𝓁𝑖is considered, the local controls already selected for
robots 𝓁1, … , 𝓁𝑖−1 are held fixed. The planner then generates
a robot-local candidate set̃ 𝓁𝑖
𝑡
(
𝑥𝑡;̃ 𝑢𝓁1
𝑡, … ,̃ 𝑢𝓁𝑖−1
𝑡
)
, where
each candidate modifies only the schedule of robot 𝓁𝑖and
only uses requests that have entered the system by time
𝑡. This set includes feasible assignment actions and a wait
action, as described in Section 4.3. Predicted future requests
are not included in the immediate candidate set.
For a candidate local control
𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡∈̃ 𝓁𝑖
𝑡
(
𝑥𝑡;̃ 𝑢𝓁1
𝑡, … ,̃ 𝑢𝓁𝑖−1
𝑡
)
,
we construct a completed joint control by fixing the controls
already selected for earlier robots, applying 𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡
to robot
𝓁𝑖, and using the base policy to complete the simulated
decisions for robots that have not yet been processed:
𝑢comp,𝑖
𝑡
(
𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡
)
= Completē𝜋
(
𝑥𝑡;̃ 𝑢𝓁1
𝑡, … ,̃ 𝑢𝓁𝑖−1
𝑡
, 𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡
)
.
Here,̄ 𝜋is the interaction-aware base policy introduced in
Section 4.5. The completion step is used only to evaluate
candidate local controls inside rollout; the executable control
applied to the real system is obtained after all robots have
been processed.
The candidate 𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡is evaluated using sampled future re-
quest scenarios. Let̂ 𝑠
𝑡=
(̂
𝜔𝑠
𝑡+1,̂ 𝜔𝑠
𝑡+2, … ,̂ 𝜔𝑠̄
𝑇
)
be the 𝑠-th
sampled scenario generated from the estimated distribution̂
ℙ, wherē 𝑇= min{𝑡+ 𝐷+ 1, 𝑇} and 𝐷denotes the rollout
depth. Starting from 𝑥𝑡, the simulator applies the completed
joint control 𝑢comp,𝑖
𝑡
(𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡), incorporates the sampled future
requests in̂ 𝑠
𝑡, and then applies the base policȳ 𝜋until the
truncated horizon̄ 𝑇. Let 𝑥𝑠,𝑖,𝑢̄
𝑇
denote the resulting simulated
state.
Because pending serviceable requests have zero imme-
diate cost in the formulation of 𝐻𝑗, the rollout value is not
computed by scoring an arbitrary partially unresolved state.
Instead, before evaluating the terminal score, the base policy
is used to resolve pending requests that remain relevant
within the truncated rollout horizon. Let Resolvē𝜋(𝑥) denote
the simulated state obtained by applying the base policy to
the pending requests in state 𝑥, assigning them if feasible
and marking them rejected or no longer serviceable if they
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
cannot be completed before their deadlines. We define the
resolved weighted terminal score
𝐻𝜆
res(𝑥) = 𝐻𝜆(Resolvē𝜋(𝑥)) ,
(11)
where 𝐻𝜆is the weighted aggregate schedule score defined
in Section 4.6. Observed and scheduled requests receive
unit weight, while predicted requests are weighted according
to the current prediction-confidence values. This resolved
score ensures that a request left pending by a wait action
is not treated as cost-free indefinitely: during simulation it
is either assigned and contributes its planned delay, remains
available for assignment at a later simulated decision time,
or is eventually marked rejected or no longer serviceable and
receives the penalty Φ.
The prediction-aware rollout value of candidate 𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡
is
estimated bŷ
𝑄𝜆,𝑖
𝑡
(
𝑥𝑡, 𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡
)
= 1
𝑆
𝑆
∑
𝑠=1
𝐻𝜆
res
(
𝑥𝑠,𝑖,𝑢̄
𝑇
)
.
(12)
Because the one-step cost in Section 3.8 is defined as a
change in aggregate schedule score, this terminal-score form
is equivalent, up to a fixed baseline, to summing weighted
incremental costs over the truncated rollout horizon.
The selected local control for robot 𝓁𝑖is̃
𝑢𝓁𝑖
𝑡∈
argmin
𝑣𝓁𝑖
𝑡∈̃𝓁𝑖
𝑡
(
𝑥𝑡;̃𝑢𝓁1
𝑡,…,̃𝑢𝓁𝑖−1
𝑡
)̂ 𝑄𝜆,𝑖
𝑡
(
𝑥𝑡, 𝑣𝓁𝑖
𝑡
)
.
(13)
After the selected control is fixed, the planner proceeds
to the next robot in the order 𝑡. Once all robots have
been processed, the one-robot-at-a-time rollout control is̃
𝑢𝑡=
(̃
𝑢𝓁1
𝑡,̃ 𝑢𝓁2
𝑡, … ,̃ 𝑢𝓁𝑀
𝑡
)
. This decision rule is prediction-
aware because candidate controls are evaluated using sam-
pled future request scenarios. It is adaptive because the
contribution of predicted requests to 𝐻𝜆depends on online
confidence weights computed from recent forecast errors. It
avoids premature commitment because predicted requests
are never included in the immediate candidate sets; they
influence the decision only through their effect on simulated
downstream schedule quality.
4.3. Candidate-Control Generation and Wait
Actions
The one-robot-at-a-time rollout rule in Section 4.2 re-
quires a finite robot-local candidate set. This subsection
describes how that set is constructed. The goal is not to
enumerate all feasible controls in 𝑡(𝑥𝑡), but to generate a
small set of feasible and promising schedule modifications
for currently known requests. Predicted future requests are
deliberately excluded from this immediate candidate set;
they influence candidate selection only later, through rollout
simulation.
At decision time 𝑡, let 𝑡denote the set of known
requests that are eligible for assignment by the candidate
generator. After any selective re-optimization step has been
applied, we let
𝑡= {𝑟𝑗∈𝑡∶𝜎𝑗,𝑡= pending, 𝑎𝑗,𝑡= ∅} .
(14)
Thus, 𝑡contains requests that are known, not rejected, not
completed, and not currently fixed in an executing service.
Requests whose service has already started are excluded
because feasible controls must preserve started assignments.
Assigned but unstarted requests enter 𝑡only if the re-
optimization mechanism in Section 4.7 explicitly releases
them back to the pending set.
For each request 𝑟𝑗∈𝑡, the compatible robot set is
𝑗= {𝓁∈∶𝑘𝑗∈(𝑧𝓁)} .
(15)
When robot 𝓁is processed by the one-robot-at-a-time rollout
rule, only requests for which 𝓁is a compatible robot (i.e.
𝓁∈𝑗) are considered as assignment candidates for that
robot.
A robot-local assignment action assigns a request 𝑟𝑗∈
𝑡to a compatible robot 𝓁∈𝑗and appends the service-
node sequence 𝝆𝑗at the end of the remaining schedule of
robot 𝓁. We denote such an action by 𝑎= (𝑟𝑗, 𝓁). The action
is retained only if the resulting schedule is feasible with
respect to the constraints in Section 3.6: it must follow valid
directed paths on , visit the service nodes in the order spec-
ified by 𝝆𝑗, satisfy release-time and deadline constraints,
preserve the already executed portion of the schedule, and
return the robot to its maintenance station by time 𝑇.
For each action 𝑎= (𝑟𝑗, 𝓁), we compute two heuristic
values used only to rank candidate actions before rollout
evaluation. First, we compute a latest feasible service-start
time. Let 𝐹travel
𝓁,𝑗
denote the estimated time required for robot
𝓁to traverse the service-node sequence 𝝆𝑗, ignoring con-
gestion and conflicts with other robots, but using the type-
dependent graph travel-time estimates. The latest feasible
service-start time is
𝐹start
𝓁,𝑗
= 𝑡comp
𝑗
−𝐹travel
𝓁,𝑗
−𝐹𝑘𝑗.
(16)
This value estimates how urgent the request is: smaller
values indicate less remaining scheduling flexibility.
Second, we compute a robot-specific heuristic comple-
tion delay. Let 𝐹reach
𝓁,𝑗
denote the estimated time at which
robot 𝓁reaches the first service node of 𝑟𝑗if the request
is appended to its remaining schedule. The corresponding
heuristic completion time iŝ
𝐶𝓁,𝑗,𝑡= max
{
𝐹reach
𝓁,𝑗
, 𝑡start
𝑗
}
+ 𝐹travel
𝓁𝑗
+ 𝐹𝑘𝑗.
(17)
If̂ 𝐶𝓁,𝑗,𝑡> 𝑡comp
𝑗
, the action is discarded. Otherwise, the
heuristic delay is
𝐹delay
𝓁,𝑗,𝑡= max
{
0,̂ 𝐶𝓁,𝑗,𝑡−𝑡des
𝑗
}
.
(18)
Candidate assignment actions are ranked lexicographically
by urgency and estimated delay:
rank𝑡(𝓁, 𝑟𝑗) =
(
𝐹start
𝓁,𝑗, 𝐹delay
𝓁,𝑗,𝑡
)
.
(19)
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Actions with earlier latest feasible service-start times are
expanded first, and ties are broken by the robot-specific
heuristic delay. After sorting by (19), the generator keeps
only the first 𝐿feasible assignment actions for robot 𝓁,
where 𝐿is the candidate limit.
The ranking in (19) is used only for pruning. It is not the
rollout objective. After the robot-local candidate set has been
generated, each retained assignment action and associated
scheduled is evaluated by the rollout estimator in Section 4.2,
which accounts for sampled future requests, the base policy,
and prediction-confidence weights.
The candidate set also includes a wait action, denoted
𝑎wait
𝓁
. This action assigns no request to robot 𝓁during the
current local decision. The wait action is always included,
even when no feasible assignment action is available, so that
the robot-local candidate set is never empty. If the wait action
is selected, robot 𝓁remains unassigned in the real system for
the current decision cycle and may be reconsidered at a later
decision time.
When a wait action is evaluated inside rollout, robot
𝓁is temporarily treated as unavailable for the simulated
completion of the current local decision. This prevents the
base policy used inside the rollout simulation from imme-
diately undoing the wait action by assigning the same robot
to another pending request in the same simulated decision.
The robot is not removed from the real system; it is simply
left available for future decision times. We denote the set
of robots that must be treated as unavailable for future cost
estimation as block.
This procedure reduces the action space used by rollout
from the full feasible control set 𝑡(𝑥𝑡) to a tractable robot-
local candidate set̃ 𝓁𝑖
𝑡. The retained assignment actions are
feasible for the current robot, urgent according to their latest
feasible service-start times, and promising according to their
heuristic delay estimates. The wait action preserves the
planner’s ability to defer assignment when the downstream
rollout estimate indicates that keeping capacity available is
preferable.
4.4. Future-Request Scenario Generation
The rollout decision rule in Section 4.2 evaluates current
candidate controls by simulating possible future request
arrivals. This subsection describes how those future request
scenarios are generated. The scenario generator provides the
interface between the learned request-prediction model and
the scheduling model in Section 3: it samples future events
from the estimated distribution̂ ℙ, converts those events
into request tuples with graph-grounded service locations
and service windows, and returns sampled disturbance se-
quences that can be used directly inside rollout simulation.
Historical operating data are used to train temporal point
process models for future request generation. Rather than
predicting a single global request process over the entire
environment, we decompose demand into local request pro-
cesses. In the hospital case study, each local process corre-
sponds to a patient encounter, but the same construction ap-
plies to any setting in which future demand can be associated
Figure 2: Schematic of the neural temporal point process
used for future-request generation. Past request events are
represented as a sequence of timed marks and encoded
into a history-dependent representation. This representation
parameterizes conditional distributions over future event times
and request marks. Samples from these distributions are
then converted into graph-grounded request tuples for rollout
simulation.
with local entities, regions, or service contexts. Let 𝑡denote
the set of local processes active at decision time 𝑡. For each
process 𝑝∈𝑡, let
𝑝,𝑡=
(
(𝜏𝑝,1, 𝜅𝑝,1), … , (𝜏𝑝,𝑁𝑝,𝑡, 𝜅𝑝,𝑁𝑝,𝑡)
)
(20)
denote the observed timed-mark history available at time 𝑡.
Here, 𝜏𝑝,𝑞is the time of previously observed request event
𝑞and 𝜅𝑝,𝑞is its mark. The mark encodes the task family or
request type, together with any discrete attributes used by
the trained prediction model. The number of timed marks
considered in the history is denoted by 𝑁𝑝,𝑡.
For each active process 𝑝, the trained temporal point
process defines a conditional distribution over future timed
marks. For rollout sample 𝑠, we draw
{
(̂𝜏𝑠
𝑝,𝑞,̂ 𝜅𝑠
𝑝,𝑞)
}
𝑞≥1 ∼̂ ℙ𝑝
(⋅∣𝑝,𝑡
)
(21)
up to the truncated rollout horizon. Figure 2 illustrates
this prediction module. The observed timed-mark prefix is
encoded by a neural temporal point process, whose history-
dependent representation parameterizes conditional distri-
butions over future event times and marks. Samples from
these conditional distributions provide the raw future de-
mand events used by the scenario generator.
The temporal point process samples timed marks, but the
rollout simulator requires request tuples of the form defined
in Section 3.3. We therefore apply a deterministic request-
construction map to each sampled timed mark. Given a
sampled event (̂𝜏𝑠
𝑝,𝑞,̂ 𝜅𝑠
𝑝,𝑞), the mark is decoded into a task
typê 𝑘𝑗and any task-specific attributes. The sampled time
is converted into the desired service timê 𝑡des
𝑗, while the
entry time, earliest allowable start time, and deadline are
constructed from task-specific service-window parameters.
We write this conversion abstractly aŝ
𝑟𝑗= Γ
(
𝑝,̂ 𝜏𝑠
𝑝,𝑞,̂ 𝜅𝑠
𝑝,𝑞
)
=
(̂
𝑘𝑗,̂ 𝝆𝑗,̂ 𝑡entry
𝑗
,̂ 𝑡start
𝑗
,̂ 𝑡des
𝑗,̂ 𝑡comp
𝑗
)
.
(22)
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Where Γ is a request constructor operator. The endpoint
sequencê 𝝆𝑗is obtained from the local process context and
the task type. In the hospital case study, the process con-
text identifies the patient location at the sampled time. For
single-location service requests, this location is the service
endpoint. For multi-location requests, such as delivery tasks,
the endpoint sequence also includes the relevant supply or
pickup location before the destination endpoint. Thus, the
learned model predicts irregular timed marks, while the
planner converts those marks into graph-grounded service
requests using known location and task mappings.
For rollout sample 𝑠, the generator aggregates all pre-
dicted requests into a sampled future disturbance sequencê
𝑠
𝑡=
(̂
𝜔𝑠
𝑡+1,̂ 𝜔𝑠
𝑡+2, … ,̂ 𝜔𝑠̄
𝑇
)
,̄
𝑇= min{𝑡+𝐷+1, 𝑇},
(23)
where 𝐷is the rollout depth. Eacĥ 𝜔𝑠
𝜏is a set of predicted
requests that enter the simulated system at future decision
time 𝜏. Let 𝜓(̂𝑟𝑗) denote the decision time associated with
the predicted entry timê 𝑡entry
𝑗
. Then̂ 𝑟𝑗is added to the bucket̂
𝜔𝑠
𝑡′, where 𝑡′ = 𝜓(̂𝑟𝑗) and 𝜓(̂𝑟𝑗) ∈𝑡+ 1, … ,̄ 𝑇. Algorithm 1
summarizes the scenario-generation procedure.
The generator also filters predicted requests that match
requests already known to the planner. This prevents the
rollout estimator from double-counting scheduled requests
or real-time requests already observed in 𝑡. A predicted
request is treated as matching a known request if it has the
same task type, compatible service-node context, and a pre-
dicted service time within a tolerance window Δ. Matched
predictions are removed before the sampled disturbance
sequence is passed to the rollout simulator.
Algorithm 1 Future-request scenario generation
Input: State 𝑥𝑡, active local processes 𝑡, local histories
𝑝,𝑡, local TPP modelŝ ℙ𝑝, request-construction map Γ,
rollout depth 𝐷, sample count 𝑆, match tolerance Δ.
Output: Sampled future request sequenceŝ 1
𝑡, … ,̂ 𝑆
𝑡.
1: Set̄ 𝑇←min{𝑡+ 𝐷+ 1, 𝑇}.
2: for 𝑠= 1, … , 𝑆do
3:
Initializê 𝜔𝑠
𝜏←∅for 𝜏= 𝑡+ 1, … ,̄ 𝑇.
4:
for each active local process 𝑝∈𝑡do
5:
Sample future timed marks from̂ ℙ𝑝(⋅∣𝑝,𝑡) up to
the truncated horizon.
6:
for each sampled timed mark (̂𝜏𝑠
𝑝,𝑞,̂ 𝜅𝑠
𝑝,𝑞) do
7:
Construct
the
predicted
request̂
𝑟𝑗
=
Γ(𝑝,̂ 𝜏𝑠
𝑝,𝑞,̂ 𝜅𝑠
𝑝,𝑞).
8:
if̂ 𝑟𝑗does not match a scheduled or already
observed request within tolerance Δ then
9:
Add̂ 𝑟𝑗to the future disturbance bucket̂ 𝜔𝑠
𝜓(̂𝑟𝑗),
if 𝜓(̂𝑟𝑗) ∈{𝑡+ 1, … ,̄ 𝑇}.
10:
Form̂ 𝑠
𝑡= (̂𝜔𝑠
𝑡+1, … ,̂ 𝜔𝑠̄
𝑇).
11: return̂ 1
𝑡, … ,̂ 𝑆
𝑡.
The resulting scenarios have the same request structure
as the observed request process in Section 3. Consequently,
future demand is evaluated inside rollout using the same
compatibility, routing, service-window, and scheduling con-
straints as real requests, while remaining excluded from the
immediate candidate-control set.
4.5. Interaction-Aware Base Policy for
Future-Cost Estimation
The one-robot-at-a-time rollout rule evaluates each can-
didate local control by simulating future system evolution.
Because this simulation is repeated across candidate actions,
robots, and sampled future request scenarios, the policy used
inside rollout must be much cheaper than solving the full
online scheduling problem. We therefore use an interaction-
aware base policy, denoted̄ 𝜋, to approximate downstream
assignment cost after a candidate control has been applied.
The base policy is used in two places. First, in the
completion operator Completē 𝜋, it fills in simulated assign-
ments for robots that have not yet been processed by the
one-robot-at-a-time rollout rule. Second, in the resolution
operator Resolvē 𝜋, it attempts to resolve pending requests
before the truncated terminal score is evaluated. In both
cases, the base policy is used only inside rollout simulation.
It is not required to produce the final executable paths
applied to the real robots; instead, it provides a fast estimate
of how difficult the remaining requests are likely to be after
the current candidate decision.
Given a simulated statẽ 𝑥and a batch of requests ,
the base policy processes requests in priority order. The
priority is based on the latest feasible service-start time
used in Section 4.3: requests with less remaining scheduling
flexibility are considered first. The batch may contain newly
sampled future requests, requests left pending by earlier
simulated decisions, or requests released for reconsidera-
tion in the simulated state. Predicted and observed requests
are processed by the same assignment routine; prediction-
confidence weights are applied later when the resulting
simulated state is scored.
For each queued request 𝑟𝑗, the base policy considers
compatible robots 𝓁∈𝑗. Robots that have been temporar-
ily blocked by a wait action in the current rollout evaluation
are excluded, so that the base policy cannot immediately
undo the candidate wait decision being evaluated. For each
remaining compatible robot, the policy estimates the com-
pletion time that would result from appending 𝑟𝑗to the
robot’s simulated schedule. This estimate is calculated using
the type-dependent graph travel times through the service-
node sequence 𝝆𝑗, the request service durations, release-time
constraints, deadlines, and a service-node reservation table.
The service-node reservation table is the main interaction-
aware component of the base policy. It records time intervals
during which simulated robots are expected to occupy task
service nodes. When the tentative service interval for a new
request overlaps an existing reservation at the same service
node, the interval is shifted to the earliest available time that
satisfies the request’s timing constraints. Figure 3 illustrates
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 3: Reservation-table check used by the interaction-
aware base policy. A candidate service interval is computed
from the robot’s estimated arrival time and the request execu-
tion duration. If the interval overlaps an existing reservation at
the same service node, it is shifted to the earliest available
interval that satisfies the request’s timing constraints. The
resulting interval determines the estimated completion time
used to compare compatible robot assignments.
this reservation-table check. This approximation captures
service-location blocking and competition for shared service
locations without constructing full collision-free paths for
every hypothetical future request.
After estimating feasible completion times for all com-
patible robots, the request is assigned to the robot with the
smallest heuristic delay. If no compatible, unblocked robot
can complete the request before its deadline, the request
is marked as rejected or no longer serviceable in the sim-
ulated state. The resulting simulated assignments, planned
completion times, rejected-request indicators, and service-
node reservations are then used by the rollout estimator
when computing the resolved weighted terminal score. Al-
gorithm 2 summarizes the base-policy update.
This base policy preserves the constraints that most
strongly affect downstream assignment cost: robot-task com-
patibility, endpoint order, release times, deadlines, service
durations, robot availability, and service-location blocking.
At the same time, it avoids the cost of constructing full
executable schedules for every hypothetical future request in
every rollout sample. Full feasibility of the immediate real
candidate action is checked before rollout evaluation; the
base policy approximation is used only to estimate down-
stream cost and to rank current candidate controls.
4.6. Adaptive Prediction Confidence and Weighted
Rollout Costs
The rollout policy uses sampled future requests to es-
timate downstream cost, but the predictive distribution̂ ℙ
may differ from the deployment distribution ℙ. If inaccurate
predictions are trusted too strongly, the planner may preserve
capacity for requests that do not occur or make current
assignments that reflect an outdated demand pattern. We
therefore assign confidence weights to predicted requests
and update those weights online from recent forecast errors.
Algorithm 2 Interaction-aware base policy used inside roll-
out
Input: Simulated statẽ 𝑥, request batch , compatible robot
sets 𝑗, service-node reservation table, blocked robot set
block.
Output: Updated simulated statẽ 𝑥′.
1: Add requests in to the simulated state if they are not
already present.
2: Build a priority queue from unresolved requests, ordered
by latest feasible service-start time.
3: while the priority queue is not empty do
4:
Remove the highest-priority request 𝑟𝑗.
5:
Initialize best robot 𝓁∗←∅, best delay 𝑐∗←+∞,
and best service intervals ∗←∅.
6:
for each robot 𝓁∈𝑗⧵block do
7:
Estimate the earliest feasible service intervals for
𝑟𝑗if appended to robot 𝓁’s simulated schedule.
8:
Enforce endpoint order, release time, deadline, ser-
vice duration, and service-node reservation con-
straints.
9:
if all service nodes of 𝑟𝑗can be served before the
deadline then
10:
Compute the resulting heuristic delay 𝑐.
11:
if 𝑐< 𝑐∗then
12:
Set 𝓁∗←𝓁, 𝑐∗←𝑐, and store the corre-
sponding service intervals in ∗.
13:
if 𝓁∗= ∅then
14:
Mark 𝑟𝑗as rejected or no longer serviceable in the
simulated state.
15:
else
16:
Assign 𝑟𝑗to 𝓁∗, record its planned completion
time, and add ∗to the reservation table.
17: return the updated simulated statẽ 𝑥′.
The confidence mechanism affects only hypothetical re-
quests used inside rollout simulation. Observed real-time re-
quests and scheduled requests always receive unit weight be-
cause they correspond to demand that is known to the plan-
ner. Predicted requests receive context-dependent weights.
Let 𝑛𝑗denote the prediction context of a predicted request̂
𝑟𝑗. A context may encode task family, request type, spatial
region, floor, time of day, or any other grouping used to
estimate prediction reliability. Let 𝑏𝑗denote the confidence-
update bin associated with the predicted request̂ 𝑟𝑗. The
confidence weight for context 𝑛in bin 𝑏is denoted by 𝜆𝑛,𝑏∈
[𝜆min, 1], where 𝜆min ∈[0, 1] is the smallest prediction
weight allowed by the planner. A value near one means that
predictions in the context are trusted, while smaller values
reduce their effect on rollout evaluation.
For a simulated state 𝑥, let obs(𝑥) denote the observed
or scheduled requests in the state, and let̂ (𝑥) denote
the predicted requests present in the simulated state. The
weighted aggregate schedule score is
𝐻𝜆(𝑥) =
∑
𝑟𝑗∈obs(𝑥)
𝐻𝑗(𝑥) +
∑̂
𝑟𝑗∈̂(𝑥)
𝜆𝑛𝑗,𝑏𝑗𝐻̂𝑟𝑗(𝑥). (24)
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
This score is used only inside rollout simulation. It does
not alter the real system state, the feasibility constraints, or
the commitments made to observed requests. In the one-
robot-at-a-time rollout rule, 𝐻𝜆is used through the resolved
terminal score 𝐻𝜆
res, so that pending predicted requests are
resolved by the base policy before their weighted contribu-
tion is evaluated.
The weights are updated by comparing recent observa-
tions with prediction snapshots generated before those ob-
servations were available. Prediction confidence is evaluated
on fixed bins of duration Δ𝜆. Let 𝜉index the confidence-
update bin, and let 𝜉denote the short set of bins used for the
comparison. In the implementation, 𝜉includes the target bin
and adjacent bins used to tolerate small timing shifts. Let 𝑂𝑛,𝜄
be the observed request count in context 𝑛and comparison
bin 𝜄∈𝜉, and let̂ 𝑂𝑠
𝑛,𝜄be the corresponding predicted count
in rollout sample 𝑠. The update distinguishes two forecast
errors: overprediction, where predicted requests fail to occur,
and timing error, where predicted demand appears near the
predicted time but in an adjacent bin.
The sampled predictions define the mean predicted count
𝜇𝑛,𝜄= 1
𝑆
𝑆
∑
𝑠=1̂
𝑂𝑠
𝑛,𝜄.
(25)
We also compute empirical surprise scores from the sampled
predictive counts. With add-one smoothing,
𝜀over
𝑛,𝜄
=
1 + ∑𝑆
𝑠=1 𝟙{̂𝑂𝑠𝑛,𝜄≤𝑂𝑛,𝜄}
𝑆+ 1
,
(26)
𝐸over
𝑛,𝜄
= −log max{𝜀over
𝑛,𝜄, 𝜖}
(27)
𝜀under
𝑛,𝜄
=
1 + ∑𝑆
𝑠=1 𝟙{̂𝑂𝑠𝑛,𝜄≥𝑂𝑛,𝜄}
𝑆+ 1
,
(28)
𝐸under
𝑛,𝜄
= −log max{𝜀under
𝑛,𝜄
, 𝜖},
(29)
where 𝜖> 0 prevents undefined logarithms. The over-
prediction surprise 𝐸over
𝑛,𝜄
is large when the realized count
is unusually low under the predictive samples, while the
underprediction surprise 𝐸under
𝑛,𝜄
is large when the realized
count is unusually high.
To separate spurious predictions from small temporal
shifts, we first compute predicted and observed excess
counts,
𝜚+
𝑛,𝜄= [𝜇𝑛,𝜄−𝑂𝑛,𝜄]+,
𝜑+
𝑛,𝜄= [𝑂𝑛,𝜄−𝜇𝑛,𝜄]+,
(30)
where [𝑧]+ = max{𝑧, 0}. Predicted excess mass in bin 𝜄may
be matched to observed excess mass in an adjacent bin 𝜄′,
with |𝜄−𝜄′| = 1. Let 𝑚𝑛,𝜄,𝜄′ denote the amount of predicted
excess mass in bin 𝜄matched to observed excess mass in bin
𝜄′. This matched mass is treated as timing error rather than as
a completely spurious prediction. The remaining unmatched
predicted excess is
𝑃over
𝑛,𝜄
= 𝜚+
𝑛,𝜄−
∑
𝜄′∈𝜉∶|𝜄−𝜄′|=1
𝑚𝑛,𝜄,𝜄′.
(31)
The instantaneous error scores are normalized by the pre-
dicted mass in the evaluated window,
𝐵𝑛,𝜉= 𝜖+
∑
𝜄∈𝜉
𝜇𝑛,𝜄.
(32)
The overprediction score is
𝐴over
𝑛,𝜉=
1
𝐵𝑛,𝜉
∑
𝜄∈𝜉
𝑃over
𝑛,𝜄𝐸over
𝑛,𝜄,
(33)
and the timing-error score is
𝐴time
𝑛,𝜉
=
1
𝐵𝑛,𝜉
∑
𝜄∈𝜉
∑
𝜄′∈𝜉∶|𝜄−𝜄′|=1
𝑚𝑛,𝜄,𝜄′
𝐸over
𝑛,𝜄
+ 𝐸under
𝑛,𝜄′
2
. (34)
Thus, 𝐴over
𝑛,𝜉penalizes predicted mass that does not mate-
rialize even after adjacent-bin tolerance, while 𝐴time
𝑛,𝜉
penal-
izes predicted mass that appears shifted to a neighboring bin.
Unmatched observed excess corresponds to underprediction.
We record this diagnostically, but do not use it to decrease
prediction confidence, because newly observed requests en-
ter the real state with unit weight and can be handled directly
by the online planner and the re-optimization mechanism.
The instantaneous scores are smoothed over time:
𝑆over
𝑛,𝜉
= (1 −𝛼over)𝑆over
𝑛,𝜉−1 + 𝛼over𝐴over
𝑛,𝜉,
(35)
and
𝑆time
𝑛,𝜉
= (1 −𝛼time)𝑆time
𝑛,𝜉−1 + 𝛼time𝐴time
𝑛,𝜉,
(36)
where 𝛼over, 𝛼time ∈[0, 1] control the responsiveness of the
update. The confidence weight is then
𝜆𝑛,𝜉= 𝜆min +(1−𝜆min) exp
(
−𝛽over𝑆over
𝑛,𝜉
−𝛽time𝑆time
𝑛,𝜉
)
,
(37)
where 𝛽over, 𝛽time ≥0 control how strongly the smoothed
errors reduce confidence. Persistent overprediction or timing
mismatch therefore lowers the weight assigned to future pre-
dicted requests in the same context. In our implementation,
we typically choose 𝛽over ≥𝛽time, because persistent over-
prediction can cause rollout to reserve capacity for demand
that does not occur, whereas small timing shifts may still
correspond to nearby real demand. If a prediction snapshot
contains no positive predicted mass for a context, the update
for that context is skipped and the previous smoothed error
states are retained.
For sparse local processes, the implementation uses a
hierarchical fallback to avoid overreacting to limited evi-
dence. Let 𝜆loc
𝑛,𝜉be the local context weight, let 𝜆fb
𝑛,𝜉be a
broader fallback-context weight, and let 𝑐𝑛,𝜉be the number
of positive-prediction windows observed so far for context
𝑛. The local credibility coefficient is
𝜒𝑛,𝜉=
𝑐𝑛,𝜉
𝑐𝑛,𝜉+ 𝜁,
(38)
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
where 𝜁≥0 is a credibility prior. The effective weight
applied to a predicted request is
𝜆eff
𝑛,𝜉= 𝜒𝑛,𝜉𝜆loc
𝑛,𝜉+ (1 −𝜒𝑛,𝜉)𝜆fb
𝑛,𝜉.
(39)
When hierarchical fallback is enabled, the symbol 𝜆𝑛,𝜉in
(24) denotes this effective weight. Thus, new or sparse
contexts initially rely more heavily on a broader reliability
estimate, while local context weights dominate after suf-
ficient prediction evidence has accumulated. Algorithm 3
summarizes the confidence-update procedure.
Algorithm 3 Online prediction-confidence update
Input: Prediction snapshot {̂𝑂𝑠
𝑛,𝜄∶𝜄∈𝜉}𝑆
𝑠=1, observed
counts {𝑂𝑛,𝜄∶𝜄∈𝜉}, previous states 𝑆over
𝑛,𝜉−1 and
𝑆time
𝑛,𝜉−1, hyperparameters 𝛼over, 𝛼time, 𝛽over, 𝛽time, 𝜆min,
and 𝜖.
Output: Updated confidence weight 𝜆𝑛,𝜉.
1: Compute mean predicted counts 𝜇𝑛,𝜄and surprise scores
𝐸over
𝑛,𝜄, 𝐸under
𝑛,𝜄
.
2: Compute predicted excess 𝜚+
𝑛,𝜄and observed excess 𝜑+
𝑛,𝜄.
3: Match predicted excess to adjacent-bin observed excess,
yielding timing matches 𝑚𝑛,𝜄,𝑙𝜄′.
4: Compute residual overprediction mass 𝑃over
𝑛,𝜄.
5: Compute 𝐴over
𝑛,𝜉and 𝐴time
𝑛,𝜉.
6: Update 𝑆over
𝑛,𝜉
and 𝑆time
𝑛,𝜉
using (35) and (36).
7: Compute 𝜆𝑛,𝜉using (37).
8: Apply hierarchical fallback, if enabled, using (39).
9: return the effective confidence weight.
Adaptive prediction confidence provides prospective
correction. It does not change real assignments already
made by the planner; rather, it changes how strongly future
predicted requests influence subsequent rollout evaluations.
Retrospective correction of already assigned but unstarted
requests is handled by the selective re-optimization mecha-
nism in Section 4.7.
4.7. Selective Re-optimization of Unstarted
Assignments
Adaptive prediction confidence provides prospective
correction: it changes how strongly predicted future requests
influence subsequent rollout evaluations. However, chang-
ing the prediction weights does not automatically repair
assignments that were already made when those predictions
appeared reliable. The planner may therefore remain com-
mitted to a schedule that is no longer desirable after new
requests arrive or after recent observations reveal forecast
mismatch. To address this issue, we include a selective re-
optimization step for requests that have been assigned but
whose service has not yet started.
Let
unstarted
𝑡
= {𝑟𝑗∈𝑡∶𝑎𝑗,𝑡∈, 𝜎𝑗,𝑡= pending} (40)
denote the set of assigned but unstarted requests at decision
time 𝑡. These requests may be returned to the pending set
because changing their assignment does not violate the no-
reassignment constraint for started requests. Requests whose
service has already begun remain fixed until completion.
To decide when re-optimization is useful, we compare
the urgency of newly observed requests with the urgency of
assigned but unstarted requests. Let 𝐶𝑗,𝑡be a lower bound on
the earliest possible completion time of request 𝑟𝑗from state
𝑥𝑡, obtained using shortest-path travel-time estimates and the
request execution duration. We define the slack index
𝜍𝑗,𝑡= 𝑡comp
𝑗
−𝐶𝑗,𝑡.
(41)
Smaller values of 𝜍𝑗,𝑡indicate less remaining flexibility
before the request deadline. Re-optimization is considered
only when both newly observed requests and assigned but
unstarted requests are present.The re-optimization trigger is
min
𝑟𝑗∈𝑅real
𝑡
𝜍𝑗,𝑡<
min
𝑟𝑖∈unstarted
𝑡
𝜍𝑖,𝑡.
(42)
When (42) holds, at least one newly observed request is more
urgent than every currently assigned but unstarted request.
In this case, the planner releases lower-priority unstarted as-
signments back to the pending set. In particular, an assigned
but unstarted request 𝑟𝑖∈unstarted
𝑡
is eligible for release
if its slack is larger than the slack of the most urgent newly
observed request: 𝜍𝑖,𝑡> min𝑟𝑗∈𝑅real
𝑡
𝜍𝑗,𝑡.
Released requests have their assignment reset to 𝑎𝑖,𝑡= ∅
and are added to 𝑡. The affected robot schedules are then
repaired by removing the released requests while preserving
all started or completed service commitments.
After this release step, the one-robot-at-a-time rollout
policy is applied to the updated state. Newly observed re-
quests and released unstarted requests are considered to-
gether by the candidate generator, and candidate controls are
evaluated using the current prediction-confidence weights.
Thus, re-optimization allows the planner to revise eligible
commitments when new information makes the previous
schedule undesirable.
This step provides retrospective correction. Prediction-
confidence weighting reduces the influence of unreliable
future predictions in subsequent rollout evaluations, whereas
selective re-optimization allows the planner to recover from
assignments made before those forecast errors were de-
tected.
4.8. Supporting Pre-Deployment Fleet Sizing
The online planning problem in Section 3 is defined for a
fixed heterogeneous team composition 𝐌= (𝑀𝑧)𝑧∈. The
rollout policy developed above assumes that this composi-
tion is given during deployment. However, the quality of
rollout estimates depends on whether the team has enough
capacity of the right robot types to serve the request pat-
terns likely to occur in operation. If the assignment rou-
tines used inside rollout frequently reject requests or miss
deadlines, then simulated future costs become dominated by
infeasibility rather than by meaningful comparisons among
current candidate controls. We therefore use a supporting
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
pre-deployment procedure to select a heterogeneous team
composition from historical request sequences.
Let day denote a set of historical operating days. Each
day 𝑑∈day provides a realized request sequence 𝑑=
(𝜔𝑑
0, 𝜔𝑑
1, … , 𝜔𝑑
𝑇−1
). The goal is to choose a fixed composi-
tion 𝐌for which the assignment routine used in simulation
achieves a target empirical feasibility level 𝛾∈(0, 1] on
these representative days. A historical day is considered
feasible for composition 𝐌if all requests are assigned to
compatible robots, completed no later than their deadlines,
and all robots return to their assigned maintenance stations
by time 𝑇.
Our proposed team-sizing procedure has two phases.
The first phase computes day-wise feasible compositions and
uses them to initialize the team size. For each historical day
𝑑, the procedure starts from a small baseline composition
and simulates the assignment routine on 𝑑. If a request
is rejected or violates its service window, the procedure
increases the count of a robot type compatible with the failed
request and repeats the simulation. Once all requests on day
𝑑are served feasibly, the resulting day-wise composition
is recorded as 𝐌𝑑= (𝑀𝑑
𝑧){𝑧∈}. These day-wise counts
estimate the amount of type-specific capacity required by
individual historical operating days.
For each robot type 𝑧, we form the empirical distribution
of the day-wise feasible counts {𝑀𝑑
𝑧∶𝑑∈day}. Let̂
𝑝𝑧(𝑚) =
1
|day|
∑
𝑑∈day
𝟙{𝑀𝑑𝑧≤𝑚}
(43)
be the empirical distribution function for type 𝑧, where
𝟙{𝑀𝑑𝑧≤𝑚} is an indicator variable. The initial team size for
type 𝑧is chosen as the 𝛾-quantile of this empirical distribu-
tion:
𝑀(0)
𝑧
= min {𝑚∈ℤ≥0 ∶̂ 𝑝𝑧(𝑚) ≥𝛾} .
(44)
The resulting initialization is 𝐌(0) = (𝑀(0)
𝑧){𝑧∈}.
For example, if 𝛾= 0.95, then 𝑀(0)
𝑧
is the smallest count
such that at least 95% of the historical single-day sizing runs
required no more than 𝑀(0)
𝑧
robots of type 𝑧. Algorithm 4
summarizes this initialization phase.
The second phase verifies the joint composition across
all historical days. This step is necessary because the per-
centile initialization treats robot types marginally: choosing
a high percentile for each type separately does not guarantee
that the combined heterogeneous team achieves the desired
feasibility rate when task interactions, service windows,
routing, and robot-type substitution are evaluated jointly.
For a candidate composition 𝐌, define the empirical
feasibility ratê
𝑝feas(𝐌) =
1
|day|
∑
𝑑∈day
𝟙{day 𝑑is feasible under 𝐌}. (45)
where 𝟙is an indicator variable. The verification phase
starts from 𝐌(0) and repeatedly simulates the historical
days. If̂ 𝑝feas(𝐌) ≥𝛾, the current composition is accepted.
Algorithm 4 Histogram-based initialization of the heteroge-
neous team composition
Input: Historical days day, target level 𝛾, baseline compo-
sition 𝐌base.
Output: Initial team composition 𝐌(0).
1: for each historical day 𝑑∈day do
2:
Set 𝐌𝑑←𝐌base.
3:
repeat
4:
Simulate the assignment routine on 𝑑using team
𝐌𝑑.
5:
if all requests are completed feasibly and robots
return by 𝑇then
6:
Mark day 𝑑feasible under 𝐌𝑑.
7:
else
8:
Select a rejected or deadline-violating request 𝑟𝑗.
9:
Select a robot type 𝑧such that 𝑘𝑗∈(𝑧).
10:
Increase 𝑀𝑑
𝑧←𝑀𝑑
𝑧+ 1.
11:
until day 𝑑is feasible
12:
Record 𝐌𝑑= (𝑀𝑑
𝑧){𝑧∈}.
13: for each robot type 𝑧∈do
14:
Computê 𝑝𝑧from {𝑀𝑑
𝑧∶𝑑∈day}.
15:
Set 𝑀(0)
𝑧
←min{𝑚∈ℤ≥0 ∶̂ 𝑝𝑧(𝑚) ≥𝛾}.
16: return 𝐌(0).
Otherwise, the procedure identifies which robot types are
associated with failed requests and increments the type with
the largest failure score.
Let 𝑑
fail(𝐌) denote the set of requests that are rejected
or violate their deadlines on historical day 𝑑when using
composition 𝐌. The failure score of robot type 𝑧is
𝐵𝑧(𝐌) =
∑
𝑑∈day
∑
𝑟𝑗∈𝑑
fail(𝐌)
𝟙{𝑘𝑗∈(𝑧)}.
(46)
This score counts how often robots of type 𝑧could have
served failed requests. The search increases the count of a
type with the largest failure score and repeats the historical
verification. Algorithm 5 summarizes this phase.
This procedure does not prove feasibility under the de-
ployment distribution ℙ. It selects a fixed heterogeneous
team composition for which the assignment routine is em-
pirically feasible on representative historical operating days.
The selected composition is then used as the fixed team
𝐌assumed by the online problem formulation and by the
prediction-aware rollout policy.
5. Case Study: Task Assignment in Hospital
Floors
We evaluate the proposed framework on a hospital-floor
task-assignment problem constructed from historical service
requests on inpatient floors. This setting captures the main
features of the formulation in Section 3: requests arrive
over time, different task families require different robot
capabilities, requests have service windows and deadlines,
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Algorithm 5 Historical verification of the heterogeneous
team composition
Input: Historical days day, target feasibility level 𝛾, initial
composition 𝐌(0).
Output: Verified team composition 𝐌.
1: Set 𝐌←𝐌(0).
2: repeat
3:
Set 𝑁feas ←0 and 𝐵𝑧←0 for all 𝑧∈.
4:
for each historical day 𝑑∈day do
5:
Simulate the assignment routine on 𝑑using team
𝐌and base policȳ 𝜋.
6:
if all requests are completed feasibly and robots
return by 𝑇then
7:
Set 𝑁feas ←𝑁feas + 1.
8:
else
9:
Let 𝑑
fail(𝐌) be the rejected or deadline-
violating requests.
10:
for each 𝑟𝑗∈𝑑
fail(𝐌) do
11:
for each type 𝑧∈such that 𝑘𝑗∈(𝑧) do
12:
Set 𝐵𝑧←𝐵𝑧+ 1.
13:
Computê 𝑝feas(𝐌) = 𝑁feas∕|day|.
14:
if̂ 𝑝feas(𝐌) < 𝛾then
15:
Select 𝑧∗∈argmax𝑧∈𝐵𝑧, using a deterministic
tie-breaker.
16:
Increase 𝑀𝑧←𝑀𝑧∗+ 1.
17: until̂ 𝑝feas(𝐌) ≥𝛾
18: return 𝐌.
and current assignment decisions affect the robot capacity
available for future demand. It also provides a realistic
setting in which the predictive request model may be useful
on average but unreliable in particular time periods, floors,
or task contexts.
The case study has three goals. First, we evaluate whether
the temporal point process models used for scenario gen-
eration produce useful sampled future request sequences.
Second, we evaluate the pre-deployment fleet-sizing proce-
dure from Section 4.8, which selects the fixed heterogeneous
team composition used by the online policies. Third, we
compare the full prediction-aware adaptive rollout policy
against baseline assignment policies and against ablated
rollout variants. These comparisons isolate the contribution
of sampled future-demand information, adaptive prediction
reweighting, and selective re-optimization of unstarted as-
signments.
The results are presented in the same order as the com-
ponents of the proposed framework. We first evaluate the
temporal point process predictions used to generate future
scenarios. We then report the fleet-sizing results that deter-
mine the fixed monitoring and delivery robot teams. Next,
we compare the full adaptive rollout policy against baseline
online assignment policies over held-out floor-days. Finally,
we present ablation studies that separate the effects of predic-
tion reweighting and re-optimization, followed by runtime
results that assess whether the rollout computation is suitable
for online use.
Figure 4: Environment-generation pipeline used in the case
study. Starting from an architectural floor plan, we construct
a simplified three-dimensional representation of the hospital
floor and then extract a two-dimensional navigation map for
robot simulation and planning. The resulting map defines the
traversable workspace used to build the graph representation,
compute travel-time heuristics, and assign service locations for
scheduled, observed, and predicted requests.
Figure 5: Example traversal graph used in the case-study
simulations. Waypoint nodes and feasible local motion edges
are overlaid on the hospital navigation map, with zoomed
regions showing graph connectivity in representative corridor
and intersection areas. The resulting graph supports shortest-
path travel-time estimation and graph-constrained routing for
task assignment and scheduling.
5.1. Experimental Setup
The simulated environment consists of inpatient hospital
floors represented as traversal graphs. An example of how
the hospital floor environments are generated is shown in
Figure 4, while the extracted traversal graph for robot motion
is shown in Figure 5. Nodes in the traversal graph correspond
to traversable waypoints, patient rooms, supply rooms, and
robot parking locations, while edges encode feasible robot
motion through the floor. Each experiment uses the same
graph representation and motion-planning interface for all
policies. Shortest paths between any pair of nodes are cached
for fast retrieval and fast heuristic travel-time estimation.
Robots start from parking locations and must complete as-
signed service tasks while respecting routing, compatibility,
timing, and return-to-station constraints.
We consider two robot families. Monitoring robots serve
vital-sign requests, including blood pressure, heart rate, res-
piratory rate, temperature, and oxygen saturation tasks. De-
livery robots serve medication requests, which require visit-
ing a supply location before delivering to the patient-room
endpoint. These two robot families define the heterogeneous
team composition 𝐌= (𝑀𝑧){𝑧∈} used in the problem
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
formulation: monitoring robots and delivery robots provide
different capabilities and cannot generally substitute for one
another.
All policies are evaluated on four inpatient floors from
the west wing of BIDMC. Each floor contains approximately
25 to 30 patient beds. The historical data span June 24, 2024
through June 29, 2025. For each floor, we select six ISO
weeks for evaluation: two high-demand weeks, two medium-
demand weeks, and two low-demand weeks. This produces
42 test days per floor and 168 floor-day evaluations per
policy. Each floor-day is simulated over a 12 hour window
starting at 6𝑎𝑚and ending at 6𝑝𝑚, with one simulator time
step corresponding to one second. The rest of the historical
data is left as part of the training and validation sets. Request
arrivals, service windows, patient-room endpoints, supply-
room endpoints, and scheduled medication times are taken
from the processed hospital historical data.
5.1.1. Constructing the Test Set
The held-out evaluation set is designed to test the poli-
cies under different demand regimes on each floor. We iden-
tify high-, medium-, and low-demand weeks using Laney 𝑢-
charts [71], a statistical process-control method for identify-
ing unusual count rates when the number of observational
units may vary over time. In this setting, the unit is a floor-
day, so the weekly rate is the average number of requests
per floor-day for a given floor and task type. The Laney 𝑢
chart adjusts the standard Poisson control limits using an es-
timated dispersion factor, making the demand-regime labels
less sensitive to natural overdispersion or underdispersion in
hospital request data [49].
For each floor and task type, we construct a weekly
Laney 𝑢chart over the historical data. A week is flagged as
high demand for a task type if its request rate exceeds the
upper control limit, and as low demand if its request rate
falls below the lower control limit. An example 𝑢-chart with
flagged weeks for delivery requests is shown in Figure 6.
We then aggregate flags across task types at the floor level.
High-demand and low-demand weeks are selected as those
with the largest number of corresponding task-type flags,
while medium-demand weeks provide reference operating
conditions between these extremes. This selection rule fa-
vors weeks in which the demand regime reflects a broad
change in floor activity rather than an isolated anomaly in
a single task type.
The selected weeks are listed in Table 1. Because the
split is defined at the week level, every policy is evaluated
on the same contiguous request sequences for each floor
and demand regime. This preserves temporal correlations in
the request stream and avoids evaluating policies on isolated
requests removed from their operational context.
5.2. Implementation Details
This subsection specifies the implementation choices
and parameter values used to instantiate the proposed frame-
work in the hospital-floor case study. The goal is not to
restate the algorithms in Section 4, but to describe how their
Figure 6: Example weekly delivery-request arrival rates used to
select evaluation periods. The empirical mean is shown by the
dotted blue line, and the dashed lines mark the Laney-adjusted
upper and lower control limits. Weeks exceeding these limits
are identified as abnormal high- or low-demand periods and
are used to test the robustness of the proposed planner under
demand shifts.
inputs, hyperparameters, heuristics, and motion-planning
components are configured for this domain.
Both monitoring and delivery robots are modeled as disk
robots with diameter 0.40, m. The two robot families have
different capabilities: monitoring robots can service vital-
sign requests, while delivery robots can service medication-
delivery requests. Unless otherwise stated, both robot fami-
lies use a nominal speed of 0.30, m∕s. The traversal graph is
constructed so that its edges correspond to physically realiz-
able motions under the robot footprint and speed assump-
tions. All committed robot trajectories are planned using
a variant of Safe Interval Path Planning with reservation
tables, denoted SIPPwRT [61], which extends SIPP [82]
time-interval reasoning with reservations induced by pre-
viously planned robot trajectories [91]. This choice is well
suited to prioritized multi-robot routing because each robot
can be planned sequentially while treating earlier planned
trajectories as dynamic reservations.
5.2.1. One-Robot-at-a-Time Rollout Configuration
The one-robot-at-a-time rollout rule in Section 4.2 re-
quires an ordering of robots at each decision time. In the
case study, the ordering set 𝑡is constructed from the
current simulator state by sorting robots according to the
time at which they are expected to become available. Robots
that are already available and unassigned are considered
first, followed by robots whose currently assigned request
is expected to finish within two minutes. Robots with longer
remaining service times are not included in 𝑡at that deci-
sion time. If 𝑡= ∅, no new assignments are made and the
current schedules continue to execute.
The rollout depth is set to one hour of simulated opera-
tion. Since the simulator advances in one-second time steps,
this corresponds to 𝐷= 3600. Thus, each rollout evaluation
accounts for predicted and scheduled requests that may enter
during the next hour, while avoiding the computational cost
of simulating to the end of the full operating window.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 18 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Table 1
Summary of the hospital-floor test set. The table reports the selected high-, medium-, and low-demand weeks for each floor. The
final row gives the total number of requests in each demand level aggregated across all task types, selected weeks, and floors.
Floor
High-demand weeks
Medium-demand weeks
Low-demand weeks
2
2025-W06, 2025-W08
2024-W44, 2025-W14
2024-W27, 2024-W28
3
2025-W05, 2025-W10
2024-W44, 2025-W14
2024-W46, 2025-W02
7
2024-W39, 2024-W40
2024-W44, 2025-W14
2024-W46, 2025-W26
9
2024-W43, 2025-W06
2024-W44, 2025-W14
2025-W19, 2025-W21
Total requests
36,948
30,824
25,300
5.2.2. Candidate-Control Generation
The candidate generator in Section 4.3 retains at most
𝐿= 20 assignment actions per processed robot. The wait ac-
tion is then added separately, so the robot-local candidate set
contains at most 𝐿+1 controls. The value 𝐿= 20 was chosen
to preserve the most urgent and promising assignments while
keeping the number of rollout evaluations manageable.
The candidate-ranking heuristics are computed as fol-
lows. The travel heuristic 𝐹travel
𝓁,𝑗
is obtained from cached
shortest-path distances on the traversal graph. Specifically,
the shortest-path distance needed to traverse the service-
node sequence 𝝆𝑗is divided by the nominal speed of robot 𝓁.
This computation ignores dynamic robot-robot interactions
and service-node conflicts; those are handled by SIPPwRT
for committed paths and by the reservation-table approxima-
tion in the rollout base policy.
The reach estimate 𝐹reach
𝓁,𝑗,𝑡
used in the heuristic com-
pletion calculation is computed with the motion planner.
Candidate actions that cannot satisfy the request deadline
under this heuristic estimate are discarded before rollout
evaluation.
5.2.3. Future-Request Scenario Generation
Future request scenarios are generated from the temporal
point process models described in Section 4.4. In the hospital
case study, we instantiate one local TPP model per patient
process. At each rollout decision, the planner draws 𝑆= 20
future-request samples. This value was chosen to represent
variation in the predictive distribution while keeping online
rollout runtimes reasonable.
Because each TPP prediction is associated with a patient
process, the graph-grounded service nodes can be derived
directly from the patient’s room information at the sam-
pled time. For vital-sign requests, the patient room is the
service endpoint. For medication requests, the service-node
sequence includes the relevant medication supply location
followed by the patient-room endpoint.
We evaluate two mark representations for the temporal
point process models. In the standard mark representation,
vital-sign events are marked only by the request type, such as
blood pressure, temperature, oxygen saturation, heart rate, or
respiratory rate. In the enhanced mark representation, vital-
sign events include both the request type and a discretized
representation of the measured value, so that the model can
condition on the magnitude of recent patient measurements.
Medication names are first mapped to RxNorm identi-
fiers [72]. The medication mark is then constructed from
Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) codes [101]. In the
standard medication mark representation, we use the ATC
level-3 code. In the enhanced medication mark representa-
tion, we use the first three ATC hierarchy components, which
provide a richer representation of the medication class while
avoiding excessive sparsity at the individual-drug level.
Predicted requests that match scheduled or already ob-
served requests are removed before rollout evaluation. The
matching tolerance is set to Δ = 10 minutes. Thus, a sampled
prediction is removed if it corresponds to a request of the
same task context that is already known to the simulator
within a (10)-minute time window. This prevents the roll-
out estimator from double-counting demand that is already
represented in the state.
5.2.4. Interaction-Aware Base Policy
The base policy used inside rollout is the interaction-
aware future-cost estimator described in Section 4.5. Its
reservation table is a simplified version of the full SIPP-
wRT reservation table used for committed motion planning.
Instead of reserving all vertices and edges along complete
robot trajectories, the base-policy reservation table only
records service intervals at patient rooms and medication
supply rooms. This approximation captures the dominant
service-location interactions while avoiding the cost of plan-
ning full collision-free paths for every hypothetical future
request in every rollout sample.
For each simulated assignment considered by the base
policy, estimated service times are computed using cached
graph shortest paths, the nominal robot speed, request exe-
cution durations, release times, deadlines, and the simplified
service-node reservation table. If a tentative service interval
overlaps a reservation at the same patient room or supply
room, the interval is shifted to the earliest available time
that satisfies the request’s service-window constraints. If
no feasible interval exists before the request deadline, the
request is marked as rejected or no longer serviceable in the
simulated state.
5.2.5. Adaptive Prediction Confidence
The adaptive prediction-confidence mechanism in Sec-
tion 4.6 is enabled for rollout variants with prediction
reweighting. Prediction weights are updated in bins of length
Δ𝜆= 5 minutes. The minimum prediction weight is 𝜆min =
0.05, so predicted requests can be strongly downweighed
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 19 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
but are not completely ignored. The exponential smoothing
parameters are 𝛼over = 0.3 and 𝛼time = 0.2. Thus, the
overprediction state reacts somewhat faster than the timing-
error state. The confidence-decay parameters are 𝛽over =
4.0 and 𝛽time = 1.0, which makes persistent overpredic-
tion reduce confidence more strongly than one-bin timing
shifts. The numerical constant used for normalization and
logarithmic clipping is 𝜖= 10−6. Hierarchical fallback is
enabled in all rollout variants that use adaptive prediction
confidence. The local-context credibility prior is 𝜁= 3.0.
Therefore, patient-specific confidence weights are initially
blended strongly with the broader fallback context, and they
dominate only after enough positive-prediction windows
have been observed. Confidence updates are skipped for
zero-prediction windows, so contexts are not penalized or
rewarded when the prediction snapshot contains no positive
predicted mass.
5.2.6. Scheduled Requests, Re-optimization, and
Decision Triggers
Known future scheduled requests are included in the
rollout future-cost estimate for the proposed rollout variants.
They are treated as known commitments and receive unit
weight in the weighted schedule score. However, they are
not added to the immediately assignable request set until
they enter the simulator state. In contrast, stochastic TPP
predictions are never eligible as immediate assignment ac-
tions; they affect decisions only through sampled rollout
simulations and confidence-weighted future costs.
Selective re-optimization is enabled only in rollout vari-
ants that include the mechanism described in Section 4.7.
When enabled, assigned but unstarted requests may be re-
leased back to the pending set if newly observed requests
have smaller slack. Started requests are never released or
reassigned.
5.3. Temporal-Point-Process Prediction Ablation
Before evaluating the online assignment policies, we
evaluate the temporal point process models used to gener-
ate future request scenarios in Section 4.4. This ablation
serves two purposes. First, it identifies the prediction model
configuration used by the rollout policies in the remaining
experiments. Second, it tests whether richer timed-mark rep-
resentations and previous-day context improve the quality of
sampled future request sequences in the hospital setting.
The ablation compares the candidate temporal point
process models used to sample future request sequences. The
model set includes: RMTPP [29], NHP [66], FullyNN [77],
SAHP [110], THP [116], IntesityFree [87], AttnNHP [67],
ANHN [104], WSM-THP [18], S2P2 [19], TriTPP [88],
inhomogeneous Poisson [88], Renewal [88] , Modulated
Renewal [88], Spline Transformer [88], and FlexTPP-based
variants [28]. The implementation of the first 8 methods was
derived from [103], while the implementation for the rest
of the methods was derived from their respective papers.
The only modifications applied to all architectures were
dimensionality adjustments needed to process the enhanced
marks. All models under consideration were tested for both
enahnced and standard marks. The standard mark repre-
sentation uses only the request type for vital-sign requests
and a coarser medication-code representation for medication
requests. The enhanced mark representation augments vital-
sign marks with discretized measurement information and
uses a richer medication-code representation, as described
in Section 5.2.
For the FlexTPP variants, we also compare models
trained with and without previous-day summary condi-
tioning. Previous-day conditioning summarizes the recent
patient-level history available before the prediction prefix.
For vital-sign requests, this includes whether previous-
day context is available, the time since the last previous-
day request, total previous-day request count, task-specific
request counts, task-specific last request times, and summary
statistics of previous-day measurements. For medication
requests, the conditioning vector summarizes previous-day
vital-sign and medication-administration activity for the
same local patient process.
We train all architectures for 300 epochs using the train-
ing set. We select the log likelihood as the optimization
objective for each temporal point process, and we use Adam
[47] as the optimizer. The learning rate for each architecture
is chosen using a hyper-parameter search. We choose a batch
size of 32, and we shuffle the batches at every epoch during
training. The number of layers and the width of each layer for
each architecture are chosen following the recommendations
given in their respective papers. All training was done using
two NVIDIA RTX A6000 ADA.
Prediction quality is evaluated by comparing sampled
future event sequences against the realized future sequence.
For a local process 𝑝and prediction prefix ending at time 𝑡,
let̂
𝑊𝑠
𝑝,𝑡=
(̂
𝑒𝑠
1, … ,̂ 𝑒𝑠̂
𝑁𝑠
)
,
𝑊𝑝,𝑡= (𝑒1, … , 𝑒𝑁
) (47)
denote the 𝑠-th sampled predicted suffix and the correspond-
ing realized suffix, wherê 𝑁𝑠is the number of predicted
events and 𝑁is the actual number of observed events. Each
event is a timed mark 𝑒= (𝜏, 𝑘, 𝜅), where 𝜏is the event
time, 𝑘is the request type, and 𝜅is the model-specific
mark representation. We evaluate each sampled suffix using
a marked Optimal Transport Distance (OTD), implemented
as an ordered edit-alignment distance between̂ 𝑊𝑠
𝑝,𝑡and 𝑊𝑝,𝑡.
Matching a predicted event̂ 𝑒𝑠
𝑖to a realized event 𝑒𝑗
incurs the substitution cost
𝑑sub
(̂𝑒𝑠
𝑖, 𝑒𝑗
) = 𝛼OTD
|||̂𝜏𝑠
𝑖−𝜏𝑗|||
𝜏scale
𝑘𝑗
+ 𝛽OTD𝟙{̂
𝑘𝑠
𝑖≠𝑘𝑗
}, (48)
where 𝜏scale
𝑘𝑗
is a task-specific time scale used to normalize
timing errors. Predicted events that cannot be matched to
realized events incur deletion cost 𝑐del, and realized events
that are missing from the prediction incur insertion cost 𝑐ins.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 20 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
The sequence-level OTD is
OTD
(̂
𝑊𝑠
𝑝,𝑡, 𝑊𝑝,𝑡
)
= min

[
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈match
𝑑sub
(̂𝑒𝑠
𝑖, 𝑒𝑗
)
+ 𝑐del|del| + 𝑐ins|ins|
]
, (49)
where ranges over all ordered edit alignments between the
sampled and realized suffixes. Lower OTD values indicate
better agreement in event timing, task type, and sequence
length. For each prediction prefix, we estimate the expected
OTD over sampled futures bŷ
OTD𝑝,𝑡=
1
𝑆eval
𝑆eval
∑
𝑠=1
OTD
(̂
𝑊𝑠
𝑝,𝑡, 𝑊𝑝,𝑡
)
,
(50)
where 𝑆eval is the number of sampled futures used for the
prediction evaluation.
For all OTD results reported below, we use 𝑆eval = 20,
𝛼OTD
= 1.0, 𝑐del
= 1.0, and 𝑐ins
= 1.0. The timing
weight 𝛼OTD controls the contribution of normalized timing
error for matched events. The deletion penalty 𝑐del penalizes
spurious predicted events, and the insertion penalty 𝑐ins
penalizes realized events that were missed by the prediction.
The normalizing constant 𝜏scale
𝑘𝑗
is set to the mean inter-event
time for request type 𝑘𝑗in the training data.
For monitoring requests, we use a finite request-type
substitution penalty 𝛽OTD = 0.25. This allows the alignment
to match different vital-sign request types at a small cost,
reflecting that the same monitoring robot can service all
vital-sign tasks. The resulting OTD decomposes into timing,
request-type mismatch, deletion, and insertion components.
For medication-delivery requests, we use hard type match-
ing: substitutions between different medications are disal-
lowed. This reflects that different medication requests should
not be treated as interchangeable. Therefore, the delivery
OTD decomposes into timing, deletion, and insertion com-
ponents, without a finite request-type mismatch component.
The OTD evaluation is stratified by the same high-,
medium-, and low-demand weeks used in the assignment-
policy experiments. Because the qualitative conclusions
were similar across load regimes, Figures 7 and 8 report
the high-demand results, where prediction errors are most
likely to affect downstream assignment decisions. Figure 7
summarizes monitoring-request prediction, and Figure 8
summarizes medication-delivery prediction.
For monitoring requests, Figure 7 shows that the FlexTPP
model with enhanced marks and previous-day context ob-
tains the lowest OTD among the evaluated configurations.
This result indicates that measurement-aware marks and re-
cent patient-level history provide useful signal for predicting
future vital-sign request sequences, provided that the model
architecture can use the additional conditioning information
effectively.
For medication-delivery requests, Figure 8 shows that
FlexTPP-based models also outperform the other evaluated
Table 2
Selected heterogeneous team composition.
Phase
Monitoring robots
Delivery robots
Histogram
initialization
6
2
Joint historical
verification
6
3
prediction models. However, unlike the monitoring case, the
enhanced mark representation and previous-day context do
not consistently improve OTD. One likely explanation is that
medication-code features are substantially sparser than vital-
sign marks, so the richer representation increases feature
granularity without providing enough repeated evidence for
the model to exploit. Based on these results, the rollout
experiments use the best-performing monitoring and med-
ication prediction configurations identified by this ablation
to generate future request scenarios.
5.4. Team-Sizing Results
We next evaluate the historical team-composition pro-
cedure described in Section 4.8. This step determines the
fixed heterogeneous team 𝐌used in the subsequent online
policy experiments. The procedure is important because
monitoring and delivery robots provide different capabili-
ties: additional delivery robots cannot resolve monitoring
bottlenecks, and additional monitoring robots cannot resolve
medication-delivery bottlenecks. The sizing procedure must
therefore select enough capacity for each robot family while
also verifying that the resulting joint team composition
is feasible when all request types, timing constraints, and
routing interactions are evaluated together.
Figure 9 shows the day-wise robot requirements pro-
duced by the histogram-based initialization phase in Al-
gorithm 4. For each historical floor-day, the sizing routine
increases the number of robots in the relevant family until
all requests of that family can be served feasibly. The mon-
itoring histogram summarizes the number of monitoring
robots required across historical floor-days, and the delivery
histogram summarizes the corresponding requirement for
medication-delivery robots. Using the 99-th percentile of
these empirical distributions gives an initial team compo-
sition of 6 monitoring robots and 2 delivery robots.
The initialized composition is then checked using the
joint historical verification phase described in Algorithm 5.
Table 2 summarizes the composition before and after this
verification step. The monitoring fleet remains unchanged at
6 robots, while the delivery fleet increases from 2 to 3 robots.
The increase in delivery capacity illustrates why the ver-
ification phase is necessary: marginal percentile estimates
for each robot family do not necessarily guarantee that the
combined team achieves the target empirical feasibility level
once shared timing constraints, routing interactions, and
multi-request schedules are evaluated jointly. The verified
team composition 𝐌= (6, 3) is used as the fixed het-
erogeneous robot team in the remaining policy-comparison
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 21 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 7: Comparison of temporal point process (TPP) models for monitoring-request prediction using the OTD metric. Each
stacked bar reports mean OTD for one model configuration, decomposed into timing, request-type, deletion, and insertion
components. Error bars indicate variability across evaluation samples. Lower values indicate better agreement between predicted
and observed request sequences, while smaller deletion and insertion components correspond to fewer missed or spurious predicted
events. TPP model names and references are given at the beginning of Section 5.3. In the model labels, (+) denotes the use of
enhanced marks, (𝐶) denotes conditioning on previous-day information, and (𝐶)(+) denotes the use of both enhanced mark and
previous day conditioning.
Figure 8: Comparison of temporal point process (TPP) models for medication-delivery prediction using the OTD metric. Each
stacked bar reports mean OTD for one model configuration, decomposed into timing, request-type, deletion, and insertion
components. Error bars indicate variability across evaluation samples. Lower values indicate better agreement between predicted
and observed request sequences, while smaller deletion and insertion components correspond to fewer missed or spurious predicted
events.TPP model names and references are given at the beginning of Section 5.3. In the model labels, (+) denotes the use of
enhanced marks, (𝐶) denotes conditioning on previous-day information, and (𝐶)(+) denotes the use of both enhanced mark and
previous day conditioning.
and ablation experiments, so subsequent performance dif-
ferences reflect the online assignment policies rather than
differences in available fleet capacity.
5.5. Policy Comparison
We next compare the proposed adaptive rollout policy
against reactive, deadline-aware, prediction-based, and my-
opic assignment baselines. All policies are evaluated on
the same held-out floor-days defined in Section 5.1.1, using
the fixed heterogeneous team composition selected in Sec-
tion 5.4. Thus, differences in performance reflect the online
assignment policy rather than differences in fleet capacity,
request streams, traversal graphs, or robot capabilities.
The main proposed method is the adaptive rollout pol-
icy with future scheduled requests, temporal-point-process
prediction scenarios, adaptive prediction reweighting, and
selective re-optimization enabled. This policy uses predicted
requests only inside rollout simulations; immediate assign-
ment actions are restricted to requests that have already
entered the system.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 22 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 9: Day-wise robot requirements obtained during team-
size initialization. For each historical day, the sizing routine
increases the number of monitoring or delivery robots until all
requests are feasibly served. The histograms summarize the
resulting feasible robot counts across historical days and are
used to initialize the heterogeneous team composition at the
desired empirical percentile.
5.5.1. Baselines for Comparison
The comparison includes the following policies.
Fleet Manager. The Fleet Manager baseline is a reactive
queue-based policy adapted from [83]. Requests are pro-
cessed according to their release times. When a compatible
robot is available, the policy assigns the next request to the
available robot that can reach it most quickly. A collision-
free path is then planned for the assignment, while previ-
ously committed paths are treated as fixed and immutable.
This baseline represents a simple operational dispatching
strategy that does not explicitly reason about future requests.
Token Passing (TP). The Token Passing baseline follows
the multi-agent task-allocation framework of [62]. Robots
request a shared token when they are available. When a robot
holds the token, it selects an unassigned task using a local
cost based on travel distance to the task, without explicitly
accounting for deadline urgency or future demand. After the
task is selected, the robot plans a path to the task location
while avoiding the trajectories of other robots. This baseline
captures a standard decentralized assignment strategy with
prioritized path planning.
Token Passing with Task Swaps (TPTS). The Token
Passing with Task Swaps baseline extends token passing by
allowing unstarted tasks to be reassigned when a different
robot can serve them more effectively [62]. When a robot
considers a task that is already assigned but not yet started,
the policy may remove that assignment and assign the task
to the current robot, provided that the displaced robot can
obtain another feasible assignment. This baseline introduces
limited reassignment flexibility while remaining reactive
and myopic.
Token Passing with Deadlines (TP-D). The deadline-
aware token-passing baseline incorporates request deadlines
into the task-selection objective [63]. Instead of ranking
tasks only by travel cost, the policy uses a weighted score
that combines travel cost and deadline urgency. We set the
deadline-weight parameter to 𝛼= 0.2, which was selected
by grid search over 𝛼∈0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 on the tuning
runs. This baseline tests whether explicit deadline awareness
improves service reliability relative to distance-based token
passing.
Deadline-Aware Token Passing with Task Swaps (D-
TPTS). This baseline combines deadline-aware task scor-
ing with reassignment of unstarted tasks [63]. Newly avail-
able robots request the token, evaluate deadline-aware as-
signment costs, and may deallocate lower-priority unstarted
tasks when a more urgent task arrives. We again use 𝛼=
0.2, selected from the same grid search. This policy is
the strongest token-passing baseline because it combines
deadline awareness with limited schedule repair.
Idle Rebalance. The Idle Rebalance baseline uses pre-
dictions of future requests to reposition idle robots [30].
When robots are idle, predicted requests can act as pseudo-
tasks that influence robot positioning. This differs from the
proposed rollout policy: in our method, predicted requests
are never immediate assignment actions and affect decisions
only through the simulated future-cost estimate.
Greedy Assignment Policy (Base Policy). The greedy
assignment baseline is the standalone myopic policy that
we proposed as the base policy for rollout in Section 4.5.
It orders currently known requests by urgency, evaluates
compatible robots, and assigns the request to the robot that
results in the lowest heuristic assignment cost.
Proposed Adaptive Rollout (Our Approach). The pro-
posed method is the prediction-aware adaptive rollout policy
developed in Section 4. It restricts immediate candidate
actions to currently observed eligible requests, evaluates
each candidate through sampled future request scenarios,
scores predicted requests using adaptive confidence weights,
and selectively re-optimizes assigned but unstarted requests
when newly observed demand makes the current schedule
undesirable.
5.5.2. Performance Metrics
We evaluate policies using service-level, service-quality,
and computational metrics.
The service-level metrics are the number of serviced
and rejected requests. A request is counted as serviced if
it is assigned to a compatible robot and completed within
its service window. A request is counted as rejected if the
policy cannot assign it feasibly before its deadline. We report
these counts separately for high-, medium-, and low-demand
days, because policy differences are expected to be most
pronounced when robot capacity and request deadlines are
most constrained.
The service-quality metrics are computed over requests
that are successfully serviced. For each serviced request 𝑟𝑗,
the wait time is ℎ𝑗= max{0, 𝐶𝑗−𝑡des
𝑗}, where 𝐶𝑗is the real-
ized completion time and 𝑡des
𝑗
is the desired service time. For
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 23 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Table 3
Service-level results by demand regime. Each entry reports serviced and rejected requests for the corresponding policy and load
level.
Policy
High demand
Medium demand
Low demand
Serviced
Rejected
Serviced
Rejected
Serviced
Rejected
Fleet Manager
36,948
0
30,824
0
25,300
0
Token Passing
36,920
28
30,824
0
25,300
0
Token Passing with Task Swaps
36,920
28
30,824
0
25,300
0
Token Passing with Deadlines
36,948
0
30,824
0
25,300
0
Deadline-Aware
Token
Passing
with Task Swaps
36,948
0
30,824
0
25,300
0
Idle Prediction
36,948
0
30,824
0
25,300
0
Greedy Assignment Policy
36,948
0
30,824
0
25,300
0
Proposed Adaptive Rollout
36,948
0
30,824
0
25,300
0
each policy and day, we compute the mean serviced-request
wait time and the 95-th percentile serviced-request wait time.
We then plot the distribution of these daily statistics across
days, stratified by demand regime. The mean wait-time plots
summarize typical service responsiveness, while the 95-th
percentile plots capture tail delays.
The computational metric is the planning time required
to generate a decision for one request. We report the distri-
bution of per-request planning times across the evaluation
runs. This metric is important because the proposed rollout
policy evaluates multiple candidate actions over sampled
future scenarios, whereas the baselines generally make more
local decisions.
5.5.3. Service-Level Results
Table 3 reports the number of serviced and rejected
requests for each policy, stratified by demand regime. This
metric evaluates whether each policy can maintain feasi-
bility with the heterogeneous team selected in Section 5.4.
High-demand days are the most informative for service-
level performance because robot availability and deadline
constraints are most likely to become binding. Medium-
and low-demand days test whether the same policies remain
feasible when the system is less capacity constrained.
The selected team composition is sufficient to service
all requests for most policies across all demand regimes.
The only service-level failures occur on high-demand days
for Token Passing and Token Passing with Task Swaps,
which reject 28 requests out of 36,948 high-demand re-
quests. These rejections do not occur for the deadline-aware
token-passing variants, the Fleet Manager baseline, Idle
Prediction, the Greedy Assignment Policy, or the proposed
adaptive rollout policy.
This result has two implications. First, it supports the
fleet-sizing procedure: the selected team composition pro-
vides enough monitoring and delivery capacity to avoid per-
sistent overload on the held-out floor-days. Second, it shows
that aggregate rejection counts alone do not fully distin-
guish the stronger policies in this experiment, because most
policies achieve zero rejections once the fleet is properly
sized. The remaining comparisons therefore focus on service
quality and computational cost. In particular, the wait-time
results below evaluate whether policies that service the same
number of requests differ in how close they complete those
requests to their desired service times.
5.5.4. Request Wait-Time Results
The service-level results in Table 3 show that most
policies complete nearly all requests under the selected team
composition. We therefore use wait-time metrics to compare
the quality of the schedules produced by the policies. For
each serviced request 𝑟𝑗, wait time is computed as ℎ𝑗=
max 0, 𝐶𝑗−𝑡des
𝑗, where 𝐶𝑗is the realized completion time
and 𝑡des
𝑗
is the desired service time. For each floor-day,
we compute two daily summary statistics: the mean wait
time over serviced requests and the 95-th percentile wait
time over serviced requests. The box plots below summarize
the distribution of these daily statistics across evaluation
instances for each demand regime.
Figure 10 shows the wait-time comparison for the highest-
demand weeks. In this regime, robot capacity and deadline
constraints are most restrictive, so assignment decisions have
the largest effect on downstream congestion. The proposed
adaptive rollout policy achieves the lowest median wait time
among the evaluated methods for both the daily mean and
daily 95-th percentile metrics. The median improvement
is approximately 5% for the mean wait-time metric and
approximately 10% for the 95-th percentile metric. The
reduction is even more pronounced in the upper tail: the
proposed method reduces the 75-th percentile and maximum
values of both wait-time metrics by more than 15% relative
to the baselines.
These high-demand results indicate that the main benefit
of prediction-aware rollout is not only a reduction in typical
delay, but also a reduction in severe delay. This is consistent
with the role of rollout: candidate assignments are evaluated
based on their downstream effect on future capacity, which
helps avoid decisions that are locally feasible but create later
bottlenecks. The comparison with Idle Prediction is also in-
formative. Although Idle Prediction uses future-demand in-
formation, it treats predicted requests as positioning targets.
Its weaker performance shows that inaccurate or mistimed
predictions can bias robot movement when predictions are
treated too directly. The proposed rollout policy instead uses
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 24 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 10: Comparison of request wait times across assignment policies during the highest-demand evaluation weeks. The left
panel reports the distribution of daily mean wait times for serviced requests, and the right panel reports the distribution of daily
95-th percentile wait times for serviced requests. Each box summarizes performance across evaluation instances, with lower values
indicating shorter delays. Abbreviated policy labels correspond to the assignment policies defined in Section 5.5.1.
predictions as uncertain inputs to future-cost estimation,
with adaptive weighting and re-optimization limiting the
effect of unreliable forecasts.
Figure 11 reports the same comparison for medium-
demand weeks. This regime represents nominal operating
conditions, where the system is less congested than in the
high-demand case but still has enough request volume for
assignment quality to matter. The proposed adaptive rollout
policy again obtains the lowest median wait time for both
metrics. The median reduction is approximately 2% for
daily mean wait time and approximately 5% for daily 95-
th percentile wait time. At the 75-th percentile of the daily
distributions, the improvement is approximately 5% for the
mean metric and approximately 15% for the 95-th percentile
metric.
The medium-demand results show that rollout remains
useful even when the system is not persistently overloaded.
Under these conditions, future request predictions are gener-
ally informative enough to improve assignment timing, but
direct prediction-based repositioning is still less effective
than evaluating sampled futures through a scheduling-aware
cost estimate. The proposed method benefits from this dis-
tinction: it uses multiple sampled futures and the interaction-
aware base policy to estimate downstream cost, rather than
greedily moving robots toward individual predicted requests.
Figure 12 shows the results for the lowest-demand
weeks. In this regime, more robots are idle for longer
periods, so even simple policies can often complete requests
without rejection. Nevertheless, the proposed adaptive roll-
out policy still achieves the lowest median wait time for
both the mean and 95-th percentile metrics. The median
improvement is approximately 2% for daily mean wait time
and approximately 7% for daily 95-th percentile wait time.
At the 75-th percentile, the proposed method reduces both
metrics by approximately 10% relative to the baselines.
The low-demand results show that the proposed method
does not rely only on congestion to provide benefit. When
capacity is abundant, the main opportunity is to position
or preserve robots so that requests can be served quickly
after they arrive. Prediction-aware methods can help in this
setting, but only if the planner avoids overcommitting to
uncertain predictions. The proposed rollout policy improves
over both reactive baselines and the Idle Prediction baseline
because it evaluates predicted demand through sampled
future costs while keeping immediate assignments restricted
to requests that have actually entered the system.
Across all demand regimes, the largest and most consis-
tent gains appear in the 95-th percentile wait-time metric.
This suggests that the proposed adaptive rollout policy is
particularly useful for reducing tail delays among serviced
requests. Since most policies achieve similar service levels
under the selected fleet size, these wait-time results pro-
vide the strongest evidence that prediction-aware rollout im-
proves schedule quality beyond simply completing requests.
5.5.5. Policy Planning-Time Results
Finally, we evaluate the computational cost of each pol-
icy. This comparison is important because the proposed
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 25 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 11: Comparison of request wait times across assignment policies during medium-demand evaluation weeks. The left panel
reports the distribution of daily mean wait times for serviced requests, and the right panel reports the distribution of daily 95-th
percentile wait times for serviced requests. Each box summarizes performance across evaluation instances, with lower values
indicating shorter delays. Abbreviated policy labels correspond to the assignment policies defined in Section 5.5.1.
adaptive rollout policy performs substantially more compu-
tation than the reactive baselines: it generates robot-local
candidate actions, evaluates those candidates over sampled
future request scenarios, applies the interaction-aware base
policy inside each rollout simulation, and scores the result-
ing simulated states. The candidate limit 𝐿, sample count 𝑆,
one-robot-at-a-time decision rule, and decision-suppression
mechanism described in Section 5.2 are therefore used to
keep the computation compatible with online execution.
Figure 13 reports the distribution of planning time re-
quired to process a request-triggered decision across the
evaluated policies. As expected, the reactive and token-
passing baselines require less computation because they
make local assignment decisions without simulating sam-
pled future demand. The proposed adaptive rollout policy
has the largest planning time among the evaluated meth-
ods, but its median planning time remains approximately 2
minutes per request-triggered decision. In the hospital case
study, requests have a 5-minute lead time between entry
into the system and the earliest time at which they may be
serviced. Thus, the observed median planning time remains
within the operational window available for online decision
making.
These results show that the improved wait-time perfor-
mance of the proposed policy comes with a measurable
computational cost. However, the runtime remains prac-
tical for the simulated hospital setting under the chosen
rollout configuration. The implementation used for these
experiments evaluates rollout simulations sequentially, even
though many parts of the computation are naturally paral-
lelizable. In particular, different sampled future scenarios,
and in some cases different candidate-action evaluations,
can be evaluated independently. A parallel implementation
would therefore be expected to reduce wall-clock planning
time without changing the policy logic. The reported run-
times should consequently be interpreted as a conservative
estimate of the computational cost of the proposed rollout
policy.
5.6. Adaptive Rollout Ablation
The ablation study isolates the two adaptive mecha-
nisms introduced in Sections 4.6 and 4.7: adaptive predic-
tion reweighting and selective re-optimization of unstarted
assignments. All variants use the same one-robot-at-a-time
rollout framework, the same candidate-generation proce-
dure, the same future scheduled requests, and the same
sampled prediction scenarios. The only difference across
variants is whether predicted request costs are reweighted
online and whether assigned but unstarted requests can be
released for reconsideration.
We evaluate four rollout variants:
Rollout without adaptation. This variant uses future
scheduled requests and sampled predicted requests in the
rollout future-cost estimate, but prediction costs are not
downweighted online and assigned but unstarted requests
are not reconsidered.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 26 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 12: Comparison of request wait times across assignment policies during the lowest-demand evaluation weeks. The left
panel reports the distribution of daily mean wait times for serviced requests, and the right panel reports the distribution of daily
(95)-th percentile wait times for serviced requests. Each box summarizes performance across evaluation instances, with lower
values indicating shorter delays. Abbreviated policy labels correspond to the assignment policies defined in Section 5.5.1.
Table 4
Ablation study of the adaptive rollout components. All variants use the same rollout framework and include future scheduled
requests in the future-cost estimate. The table reports the mean and standard deviation of request wait times, in seconds, for
each demand level.
Policy
High demand
Medium demand
Low demand
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
Rollout without adaptation
49.25
90.02
34.23
78.21
25.65
68.72
Rollout with re-optimization only
46.78
86.88
32.18
74.08
24.36
65.97
Rollout with prediction reweighting only
49.39
90.49
33.70
77.25
25.17
67.69
Proposed adaptive rollout
46.01
85.41
31.88
73.54
24.28
65.91
Rollout with re-optimization only. This variant allows
assigned but unstarted requests to be returned to the pending
set when newly observed requests make the previous assign-
ment order undesirable, but predicted request costs are not
adaptively reweighted.
Rollout with prediction reweighting only. This variant
updates the contribution of predicted requests to the rollout
objective using recent forecast errors, but it does not release
previously assigned unstarted requests.
Proposed adaptive rollout. This is the full proposed pol-
icy. It combines adaptive prediction reweighting with selec-
tive re-optimization of unstarted assignments.
Table 4 reports the mean and standard deviation of re-
quest wait times for each demand regime. The mean captures
average service responsiveness, while the standard deviation
captures the spread of request delays. Lower values are better
for both metrics.
The full adaptive rollout policy achieves the lowest mean
wait time and the lowest wait-time standard deviation in
every demand regime. Relative to rollout without adaptation,
the full policy reduces mean wait time by approximately
6% under high demand, 7% under medium demand, and 5%
under low demand. It also reduces the standard deviation of
wait times by approximately 5%, 6%, and 4%, respectively.
These reductions show that the adaptive mechanisms im-
prove both average responsiveness and delay variability.
The ablation also shows that the two mechanisms play
different roles. Re-optimization provides the larger indi-
vidual improvement: by releasing assigned but unstarted
requests, it allows the planner to repair schedules that be-
come undesirable after new information arrives. Prediction
reweighting alone provides smaller benefits and, under high
demand, performs similarly to the non-adaptive rollout vari-
ant. This is expected because reweighting changes the influ-
ence of future predicted requests prospectively, but it cannot
by itself revise assignments that have already been made.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 27 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
Figure 13: Planning time per request-triggered decision across
the evaluated assignment policies. Each box plot summarizes
the computation time required to process a decision during the
evaluation runs. Lower values indicate faster online decision
making. The proposed adaptive rollout policy requires more
computation than myopic and token-passing baselines because
it evaluates candidate assignments through sampled future
scenarios, but its median planning time remains within the
operational lead time of the case-study setting. Abbreviated
policy labels correspond to the assignment policies defined in
Section 5.5.1.
When reweighting and re-optimization are combined, the
policy obtains the best performance in all regimes, indicating
that the two mechanisms are complementary: reweighting
reduces the future influence of unreliable predictions, while
re-optimization repairs eligible commitments made under
earlier forecasts.
Figure 14 compares the planning-time distributions for
the rollout ablation variants. The adaptive mechanisms add
only modest overhead relative to rollout without adapta-
tion, because the dominant computational cost is evaluating
candidate actions over sampled future scenarios. Prediction
reweighting requires only lightweight updates to prediction-
confidence weights, and re-optimization changes the set of
eligible pending requests only when the trigger condition is
satisfied.
The runtime results also show that the full adaptive
rollout policy does not incur the largest tail planning times
among the ablation variants. In particular, combining reweight-
ing with re-optimization can reduce unnecessary schedule
repair by lowering the influence of unreliable predictions
before they lead to poor assignments. Thus, the full method
improves wait-time performance without substantially in-
creasing the computational cost of the underlying rollout
procedure.
Figure 14: Planning time per request-triggered decision across
the ablation policies. Each box plot shows the distribution of
computation time required to process a decision during the
evaluation runs. Lower values indicate faster online decision
making.
6. Conclusion
This paper studied online heterogeneous multi-robot task
assignment and scheduling with scheduled requests, real-
time requests, service-window constraints, and uncertain fu-
ture demand. We formulated the problem as a finite-horizon
stochastic dynamic program in which controls update the
assignments and schedules of known requests, while future
real-time requests enter through a stochastic disturbance
process. The formulation explicitly distinguishes between
the true deployment distribution ℙand the learned pre-
dictive distribution̂ ℙ, which makes it possible to reason
about prediction error and distribution shift within the online
decision-making problem.
To address this problem, we proposed a prediction-
aware adaptive rollout framework. The key design choice
is to separate immediate commitments from future-demand
estimates: robots can only be assigned to requests that have
actually entered the system, while predicted requests influ-
ence decisions through sampled rollout simulations. This
allows the planner to account for the opportunity cost of
current assignments without prematurely committing robots
to requests that may never occur. The rollout policy is made
computationally tractable using one-robot-at-a-time deci-
sion making, heuristic candidate pruning, wait actions, and
an interaction-aware base policy for future-cost estimation.
The framework also includes adaptive mechanisms for
robustness under prediction error. Prediction-confidence
weights are updated online from recent forecast errors and
used to reduce the contribution of unreliable predicted
requests in the rollout objective. Selective re-optimization
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 28 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
complements this prospective correction by allowing as-
signed but unstarted requests to be reconsidered when
new observations make the current schedule undesirable.
Together, these mechanisms allow predictions to guide
online allocation when they are useful, while limiting their
influence when they become misleading.
The hospital-floor case study demonstrated how the
framework can be instantiated in a realistic heterogeneous
service setting. Historical request data were used both
to train temporal point process models for future-request
scenario generation and to select a fixed heterogeneous
team composition before deployment. The empirical results
showed that the selected team composition was sufficient
to avoid persistent overload on the held-out floor-days, and
that the proposed adaptive rollout policy reduced request
wait times relative to reactive, token-passing, prediction-
positioning, and myopic greedy baselines. The largest im-
provements appeared in tail wait-time metrics, indicating
that prediction-aware rollout is especially useful for avoiding
severe delays. The ablation study further showed that re-
optimization and prediction reweighting play complemen-
tary roles: re-optimization repairs eligible commitments
after new information arrives, while reweighting reduces the
future influence of unreliable predictions.
Several directions remain for future work. First, the cur-
rent implementation uses a finite set of sampled future sce-
narios and a heuristic base policy for downstream cost esti-
mation. Future work could study stronger scenario-reduction
methods, learned value approximations, or uncertainty-
aware base policies that preserve rollout quality while reduc-
ing runtime. Second, the prediction-confidence mechanism
currently relies on count-based forecast errors within pre-
defined contexts; richer calibration methods could account
for spatial structure, task dependencies, and correlations
between local request processes. Third, the selective re-
optimization rule could be extended to reason about the cost
of schedule disruption more explicitly, especially in settings
where changing unstarted assignments affects human work-
flows or resource availability. Finally, future deployments
should evaluate the framework in closed-loop physical or
high-fidelity hospital operations, where communication de-
lays, navigation uncertainty, human interaction, and opera-
tional constraints may further affect the value of prediction-
aware decision making.
Overall, the proposed framework provides a practical
way to use learned future-demand predictions in online het-
erogeneous multi-robot scheduling. By restricting immedi-
ate actions to observed requests while adaptively weighting
predicted requests in the lookahead objective, the method
exploits useful forecasts without allowing unreliable predic-
tions to dominate online decisions.
7. Acknowledgments
Authors are grateful for the Amazon Gift that funded this
research in part. This work was also supported in part by
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
under Grant No. 𝐷24𝐴𝑃00319−01. The views and conclu-
sions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not reflect the official policy or position of the U.S. Army,
U.S. Department of War, or U.S. Government.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Daniel Garces: Conceptualization, Formal Analysis, In-
vestigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualiza-
tion, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.
Sara Castro: Conceptualization, Data curation, Method-
ology, Writing - review and editing. Adrian Haimovich:
Data curation, Supervision. Byron Crowe: Conceptualiza-
tion, Data curation, Supervision. Stephanie Gil: Funding
Acquisition, Supervision, Writing - review and editing.
References
[1] Akella, P., Dixit, A., Ahmadi, M., Lindemann, L., Chapman, M.P.,
Pappas, G.J., Ames, A.D., Burdick, J.W., 2025. Risk-aware robotics:
Tail risk measures in planning, control, and verification [focus on
education]. IEEE Control Systems 45, 46–78. doi:10.1109/MCS.2025.
3577050.
[2] Arribas, E., Cholvi, V., Mancuso, V., 2023. Optimizing uav resupply
scheduling for heterogeneous and persistent aerial service. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics 39, 2639–2653.
doi:10.1109/TRO.2023.
3263077.
[3] Asadi, K., Misra, D., Kim, S., Littman, M.L., 2019.
Com-
bating the compounding-error problem with a multi-step model.
CoRR abs/1905.13320.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.13320,
arXiv:1905.13320.
[4] Aswale, A., Pinciroli, C., 2023. Heterogeneous coalition formation
and scheduling with multi-skilled robots, in: 2023 IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
5402–5409. doi:10.1109/IROS55552.2023.10342489.
[5] Augusto Zagatti, G., Kiong Ng, S., Bressan, S., 2024.
Learning
multivariate temporal point processes via the time-change theorem,
in: Dasgupta, S., Mandt, S., Li, Y. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 27th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
PMLR. pp. 3241–3249. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/
augusto-zagatti24a.html.
[6] Aziz, H., Chan, H., Cseh, A., Li, B., Ramezani, F., Wang, C.,
2021.
Multi-robot task allocation-complexity and approxima-
tion, in: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, International Founda-
tion for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC.
p. 133–141.
[7] Bai, X., Li, C., Zhang, B., Wu, Z., Ge, S.S., 2024a.
Efficient
performance impact algorithms for multirobot task assignment with
deadlines. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 71, 14373–
14382. doi:10.1109/TIE.2024.3374366.
[8] Bai, Y., Lindqvist, B., Nordström, S., Kanellakis, C., Nikolakopou-
los, G., 2024b. Cluster-based multi-robot task assignment, planning,
and control.
International Journal of Control, Automation and
Systems 22, 2537–2550. doi:10.1007/s12555-023-0745-4.
[9] Banfi, J., Messing, A., Kroninger, C., Stump, E., Hutchinson, S.,
Roy, N., 2022.
Hierarchical planning for heterogeneous multi-
robot routing problems via learned subteam performance.
IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 4464–4471. doi:10.1109/LRA.
2022.3148489.
[10] Berbeglia, G., Cordeau, J.F., Laporte, G., 2010.
Dynamic
pickup
and
delivery
problems.
European
Journal
of
Operational
Research
202,
8–15.
URL:
https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221709002999,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2009.04.024.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 29 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
[11] Bertsekas, D., 2019. Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control.
Athena Scientific optimization and computation series, Athena Sci-
entific, Nashua, NH, USA. URL: https://books.google.com/books?
id=2f85EAAAQBAJ.
[12] Bertsekas, D., 2020. Rollout, Policy Iteration, and Distributed Rein-
forcement Learning. Athena scientific optimization and computation
series, Athena Scientific., Nashua, NH, USA. URL: https://books.
google.com/books?id=Hbo-EAAAQBAJ.
[13] Binny, A.E., Dixit, A., 2025.
Who moved my distribution?
conformal prediction for interactive multi-agent systems.
ArXiv
abs/2511.11567. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
283055266.
[14] Bischoff, E., Kohn, S., Hahn, D., Braun, C., Rothfuß, S.,
Hohmann,
S.,
2024.
Heuristic
reoptimization
of
time-
extended multi-robot task allocation problems.
Networks
84, 64–83.
URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/net.22217,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/net.22217,
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/net.22217.
[15] Bopardikar, S.D., Smith, S.L., Bullo, F., 2014. On dynamic vehicle
routing with time constraints. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 30,
1524–1532. doi:10.1109/TRO.2014.2344451.
[16] Calvo, A., Capitan, J., 2024.
Heterogeneous multi-robot task al-
location for long-endurance missions in dynamic scenarios. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02062, arXiv:2411.02062.
[17] Camisa, A., Testa, A., Notarstefano, G., 2023. Multi-robot pickup
and delivery via distributed resource allocation. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics 39, 1106–1118. doi:10.1109/TRO.2022.3216801.
[18] Cao, H., Meng, Z., Ke, T., Zhou, F., 2024.
Is score matching
suitable for estimating point processes?, in: The Thirty-eighth An-
nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. URL:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HQgHCVZiHw.
[19] Chang, Y., Boyd, A.J., Xiao, C., Kass-Hout, T., Bhatia, P., Smyth, P.,
Warrington, A., 2026. Deep continuous-time state-space models for
marked event sequences, in: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems. URL: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=74SvE2GZwW.
[20] Chang, Y., J Boyd, A., Smyth, P., 2024. Probabilistic modeling for
sequences of sets in continuous-time, in: Dasgupta, S., Mandt, S.,
Li, Y. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR. pp. 4357–4365. URL:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/chang24a.html.
[21] Chaouach, L.M., Boskos, D., Oomen, T., 2022.
Uncertain un-
certainty in data-driven stochastic optimization: towards structured
ambiguity sets, in: 2022 IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and
Control (CDC), pp. 4776–4781. doi:10.1109/CDC51059.2022.9992405.
[22] Chee, K.Y., Silva, T.C., Hsieh, M.A., Pappas, G.J., 2024. Uncer-
tainty quantification and robustification of model-based controllers
using conformal prediction, in: Abate, A., Cannon, M., Margellos,
K., Papachristodoulou, A. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th Annual
Learning for Dynamics; Control Conference, PMLR. pp. 528–540.
URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v242/chee24a.html.
[23] Chen, Y., Arkin, J., Zhang, Y., Roy, N., Fan, C., 2024.
Scalable
multi-robot collaboration with large language models: Centralized
or decentralized systems?, in: 2024 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4311–4317. doi:10.1109/
ICRA57147.2024.10610676.
[24] Chen, Z., Alonso-Mora, J., Bai, X., Harabor, D.D., Stuckey, P.J.,
2021. Integrated task assignment and path planning for capacitated
multi-agent pickup and delivery. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters 6, 5816–5823. doi:10.1109/LRA.2021.3074883.
[25] Dai, W., Rai, U., Chiun, J., Yuhong, C., Sartoretti, G., 2025. Het-
erogeneous multi-robot task allocation and scheduling via reinforce-
ment learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 1–8doi:10.
1109/LRA.2025.3534682.
[26] Das, G., McGinnity, T., Coleman, S., Behera, L., 2015. A distributed
task allocation algorithm for a multi-robot system in healthcare
facilities. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems 80. doi:10.1007/
s10846-014-0154-2.
[27] Dhanaraj, N., Kang, J.H., Mukherjee, A., Nemlekar, H., Nikolaidis,
S., Gupta, S.K., 2024. Multi-robot task allocation under uncertainty
via hindsight optimization, in: 2024 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 16574–16580.
doi:10.
1109/ICRA57147.2024.10611370.
[28] Draxler, F., Meng, Y., Nelson, K., Laskowski, L., Yang, Y., Kar-
aletsos, T., Mandt, S., 2026.
Transformers for mixed-type event
sequences, in: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?
id=MtwsRjPZhf.
[29] Du, N., Dai, H., Trivedi, R., Upadhyay, U., Gomez-Rodriguez,
M., Song, L., 2016. Recurrent marked temporal point processes:
Embedding event history to vector, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA. p. 1555–1564. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.
2939875, doi:10.1145/2939672.2939875.
[30] Fan, H., Li, D., Ouyang, B., Yan, Z., Wang, Y., 2023. Improving
scheduling in multi-agv systems by task prediction.
Journal of
Scheduling , 1–10URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
265207678.
[31] Ferreira, B.A., Petrović, T., Bogdan, S., 2022. Distributed mission
planning of complex tasks for heterogeneous multi-robot systems, in:
2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on Automation Science
and Engineering (CASE), pp. 1224–1231. doi:10.1109/CASE49997.
2022.9926542.
[32] Fu, B., Smith, W., Rizzo, D.M., Castanier, M., Ghaffari, M., Barton,
K., 2023a. Robust task scheduling for heterogeneous robot teams
under capability uncertainty.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics 39,
1087–1105. doi:10.1109/TRO.2022.3216068.
[33] Fu, B., Smith, W., Rizzo, D.M., Castanier, M., Ghaffari, M., Barton,
K., 2023b. Robust task scheduling for heterogeneous robot teams
under capability uncertainty.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics 39,
1087–1105. doi:10.1109/TRO.2022.3216068.
[34] Gao, P., Siva, S., Micciche, A., Zhang, H., 2023.
Collaborative
scheduling with adaptation to failure for heterogeneous robot teams,
in: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), pp. 1414–1420. doi:10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10161502.
[35] Gibbs, I., Candès, E., 2024. Conformal inference for online predic-
tion with arbitrary distribution shifts. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 25.
[36] Gibbs, I., Candès, E.J., 2021. Adaptive conformal inference under
distribution shift, in: Proceedings of the 35th International Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates
Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA.
[37] Gosrich, W., Mayya, S., Narayan, S.R., Malencia, M., Agarwal, S.,
Kumar, V.R., 2022. Multi-robot coordination and cooperation with
task precedence relationships. 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 5800–5806URL: https://
api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252595835.
[38] Gupta, P., Isele, D., Sachdeva, E., Huang, P.H., Dariush, B., Lee,
K., Bae, S., 2025. Generalized mission planning for heterogeneous
multi-robot teams via llm-constructed hierarchical trees.
URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16539, arXiv:2501.16539.
[39] Ham,
A.,
2021.
Transfer-robot
task
scheduling
in
job
shop.
International Journal of Production Research 59, 813–
823.
URL:
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1709671,
doi:10.1080/00207543.2019.1709671.
[40] Janner, M., Fu, J., Zhang, M., Levine, S., 2019. When to trust your
model: model-based policy optimization. Curran Associates Inc.,
Red Hook, NY, USA.
[41] Ji, R., Lejeune, M., Fan, Z., 2019. Distributionally robust portfolio
optimization with starr performance measure.
SSRN Electronic
Journal doi:10.2139/ssrn.3542667.
[42] Ji, T., Luo, Y., Sun, F., Jing, M., He, F., Huang, W., 2022. When to
update your model: Constrained model-based reinforcement learn-
ing, in: Oh, A.H., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., Cho, K. (Eds.), Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
URL: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=9a1oV7UunyP.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 30 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
[43] Jiang, N., Kulesza, A., Singh, S., Lewis, R., 2015. The dependence of
effective planning horizon on model accuracy, in: Proceedings of the
2015 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multia-
gent Systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC. p. 1181–1189.
[44] Jokinen, J.P., Sihvola, T., Hyytiä, E., Sulonen, R., 2011.
Why
urban mass demand responsive transport?, in: 2011 IEEE Forum
on Integrated and Sustainable Transportation Systems, pp. 317–322.
doi:10.1109/FISTS.2011.5973631.
[45] Kalempa, V.C., Piardi, L., Limeira, M., de Oliveira, A.S., 2021.
Multi-robot preemptive task scheduling with fault recovery: A novel
approach to automatic logistics of smart factories. Sensors 21. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/19/6536, doi:10.3390/s21196536.
[46] Kannan, S.S., Venkatesh, V.L.N., Min, B.C., 2024. Smart-llm: Smart
multi-agent robot task planning using large language models, in:
2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pp. 12140–12147.
doi:10.1109/IROS58592.2024.
10802322.
[47] Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion.
CoRR abs/1412.6980.
URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:6628106.
[48] Kondor, D., Bojic, I., Resta, G., Duarte, F., Santi, P., Ratti, C.,
2022. The cost of non-coordination in urban on-demand mobility.
Scientific Reports 12. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-08427-2.
[49] Laney, D.B., 2002. Improved control charts for attributes. Quality
Engineering 14, 531–537. doi:10.1081/QEN-120003555.
[50] Lee, S., Shahzaad, B., Alkouz, B., Lakhdari, A., Bouguettaya, A.,
2023.
Autonomous delivery of multiple packages using single
drone in urban airspace, in: Adjunct Proceedings of the 2022 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Com-
puting and the 2022 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA. p. 72–74.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3544793.3560330,
doi:10.1145/3544793.3560330.
[51] Lee, Y., Williams, J., Marklund, H., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E.,
Singh, A., Finn, C., 2025. Inference-time alignment via hypothesis
reweighting, in: Second Workshop on Test-Time Adaptation: Putting
Updates to the Test! at ICML 2025. URL: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=tl2nXqQSQJ.
[52] Li, Y., Jiao, X.Y., Sun, B.Q., Zhang, Q.H., Yang, J.Y., 2021. Multi-
welfare-robot cooperation framework for multi-task assignment in
healthcare facilities based on multi-agent system, in: 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Safety for Robotics
(ISR), pp. 413–416. doi:10.1109/ISR50024.2021.9419496.
[53] Lin, V., Kaur, R., Yang, Y., Dutta, S., Kantaros, Y., Roy, A., Jha,
S., Sokolsky, O., Lee, I., 2025.
Safety monitoring for learning-
enabled cyber-physical systems in out-of-distribution scenarios, in:
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 16th International Conference on
Cyber-Physical Systems (with CPS-IoT Week 2025), Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3716550.3722022, doi:10.1145/3716550.3722022.
[54] Lindemann, L., Cleaveland, M., Shim, G., Pappas, G.J., 2023.
Safe planning in dynamic environments using conformal prediction.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8, 5116–5123. doi:10.1109/
LRA.2023.3292071.
[55] Lindemann, L., Zhao, Y., Yu, X., Pappas, G.J., Deshmukh, J.V.,
2025. Formal verification and control with conformal prediction:
Practical safety guarantees for autonomous systems. IEEE Control
Systems 45, 72–122. doi:10.1109/MCS.2025.3611545.
[56] Liu, K., Tang, Z., Wang, D., Wang, Z., Zhao, B., Li, X., 2024.
Coherent: Collaboration of heterogeneous multi-robot system with
large language models.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.15146,
arXiv:2409.15146.
[57] Liu, R., Gao, P., Shen, Y., Lin, M., Tokekar, P., 2026.
Adaptive
conformal guidance for learning under uncertainty, in: The Four-
teenth International Conference on Learning Representations. URL:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=1gxP0WtOoO.
[58] Lowalekar, M., Varakantham, P., Jaillet, P., 2018.
Online
spatio-temporal
matching
in
stochastic
and
dynamic
domains.
Artificial Intelligence 261, 71–112.
URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370218302030,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2018.04.005.
[59] Luo, R., Zhao, S., Kuck, J., Ivanovic, B., Savarese, S., Schmerling,
E., Pavone, M., 2024. Sample-efficient safety assurances using con-
formal prediction. The International Journal of Robotics Research
43, 1409–1424.
[60] Lyu, Y., Chow, C.Y., Lee, V.C., Ng, J.K., Li, Y., Zeng, J., 2019. Cb-
planner: A bus line planning framework for customized bus systems.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 101, 233–
253.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0968090X18305126, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2019.02.006.
[61] Ma, H., Hönig, W., Kumar, T.K.S., Ayanian, N., Koenig, S., 2019.
Lifelong path planning with kinematic constraints for multi-agent
pickup and delivery, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7651–7658.
doi:10.1609/aaai.v33i01.
33017651.
[62] Ma, H., Li, J., Kumar, T.S., Koenig, S., 2017. Lifelong multi-agent
path finding for online pickup and delivery tasks, in: Proceedings
of the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Mul-
tiagent Systems, Richland, SC. p. 837–845.
[63] Makino, H., Ito, S., 2024. Online multi-agent pickup and delivery
with task deadlines, in: 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 8428–8434. doi:10.1109/
IROS58592.2024.10802597.
[64] Mathew, N., Smith, S.L., Waslander, S.L., 2015.
Planning paths
for package delivery in heterogeneous multirobot teams.
IEEE
Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 12, 1298–
1308. doi:10.1109/TASE.2015.2461213.
[65] McAllister, R.D., Rawlings, J.B., 2024. On the inherent distribu-
tional robustness of stochastic and nominal model predictive control.
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 69, 741–754. doi:10.1109/
TAC.2023.3273420.
[66] Mei, H., Eisner, J., 2017. The neural Hawkes process: A neurally
self-modulating multivariate point process, in: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Long Beach. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1612.09328.
[67] Mei, H., Yang, C., Eisner, J., 2022. Transformer embeddings of ir-
regularly spaced events and their participants, in: International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
URL: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Rty5g9imm7H.
[68] Miao, F., He, S., Pepin, L., Han, S., Hendawi, A., Khalefa, M.E.,
Stankovic, J.A., Pappas, G., 2021.
Data-driven distributionally
robust optimization for vehicle balancing of mobility-on-demand
systems. ACM Trans. Cyber-Phys. Syst. 5. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/3418287, doi:10.1145/3418287.
[69] Miloradović, B., Çürüklü, B., Ekström, M., Papadopoulos, A.V.,
2023. Optimizing parallel task execution for multi-agent mission
planning. IEEE Access 11, 24367–24381. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2023.
3254900.
[70] Mohajerin Esfahani, P., Kuhn, D., 2018. Data-driven distributionally
robust optimization using the wasserstein metric: Performance guar-
antees and tractable reformulations.
Mathematical Programming
171, 115–166.
[71] Montgomery, D.C., 2019. Introduction to Statistical Quality Control.
8 ed., John Wiley & Sons.
[72] National Library of Medicine, 2026.
ATC Product Classes
in RxClass: ATCPROD.
https://lhncbc.nlm.nih.gov/RxNav/
applications/RxClass-ATC-product-classes-ATCPROD.html.
Accessed: 2026-01-26.
[73] Neville, G., Chernova, S., Ravichandar, H., 2023. D-itags: A dy-
namic interleaved approach to resilient task allocation, scheduling,
and motion planning.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8,
1037–1044. doi:10.1109/LRA.2023.3234824.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 31 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
[74] Neville, G., Messing, A., chaandar Ravichandar, H., Hutchinson,
S.A., Chernova, S., 2021. An interleaved approach to trait-based task
allocation and scheduling. 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 1507–1514URL: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:236924745.
[75] Nishi, T., Ando, M., Konishi, M., 2005. Distributed route planning
for multiple mobile robots using an augmented lagrangian decompo-
sition and coordination technique. IEEE Transactions on Robotics
21, 1191–1200. doi:10.1109/TRO.2005.853489.
[76] Notomista, G., Mayya, S., Emam, Y., Kroninger, C., Bohannon, A.,
Hutchinson, S., Egerstedt, M., 2022. A resilient and energy-aware
task allocation framework for heterogeneous multirobot systems.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics 38, 159–179. doi:10.1109/TRO.2021.
3102379.
[77] Omi, T., ueda, n., Aihara, K., 2019.
Fully neural network
based
model
for
general
temporal
point
processes,
in:
Wallach,
H.,
Larochelle,
H.,
Beygelzimer,
A.,
d'Alché-
Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc.
URL:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
39e4973ba3321b80f37d9b55f63ed8b8-Paper.pdf.
[78] Ongel, A., Loewer, E., Roemer, F., Sethuraman, G., Chang, F.,
Lienkamp, M., 2019. Economic assessment of autonomous electric
microtransit vehicles. Sustainability 11. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/2071-1050/11/3/648, doi:10.3390/su11030648.
[79] Pan, F., He, J., Tu, D., He, Q., 2020.
Trust the model when it
is confident: masked model-based actor-critic, in: Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA.
[80] Park, B., Kang, C., Choi, J., 2022.
Cooperative multi-robot task
allocation with reinforcement learning. Applied Sciences 12. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/12/1/272, doi:10.3390/app12010272.
[81] Park, J., Messing, A., Ravichandar, H., Hutchinson, S., 2023. Risk-
tolerant task allocation and scheduling in heterogeneous multi-robot
teams, in: 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5372–5379. doi:10.1109/IROS55552.
2023.10341837.
[82] Phillips, M., Likhachev, M., 2011. SIPP: Safe interval path planning
for dynamic environments, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 5628–5635. doi:10.
1109/ICRA.2011.5980306.
[83] Popolizio, F., Vinetti, M., Combrink, A., Roselli, S.F., Pia Fanti,
M., Fabian, M., 2024.
Online conflict-free scheduling of fleets
of autonomous mobile robots, in: 2024 IEEE 20th International
Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), pp.
3063–3068. doi:10.1109/CASE59546.2024.10711693.
[84] Reed, S., Campbell, A.M., Thomas, B.W., 2022.
The value
of
autonomous
vehicles
for
last-mile
deliveries
in
urban
environments.
Management Science 68, 280–299.
URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3917,
doi:10.1287/mnsc.2020.3917,
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3917.
[85] Robey, A., Chamon, L., Pappas, G.J., Hassani, H., 2022.
Proba-
bilistically robust learning: Balancing average and worst-case perfor-
mance, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR.
pp. 18667–18686.
[86] Shaheen, S., Cohen, A., 2019.
Shared ride services in
north
america:
definitions,
impacts,
and
the
future
of
pooling.
Transport Reviews 39, 427–442.
URL:
https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0144164722001301,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2018.1497728.
[87] Shchur, O., Biloš, M., Günnemann, S., 2020a. Intensity-free learn-
ing of temporal point processes, in: International Conference on
Learning Representations. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
HygOjhEYDH.
[88] Shchur, O., Gao, N., Biloš, M., Günnemann, S., 2020b. Fast and
flexible temporal point processes with triangular maps, in: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
[89] Shen, J., Lai, H., Liu, M., Zhao, H., Yu, Y., Zhang, W., 2023.
Adaptation augmented model-based policy optimization.
Journal
of Machine Learning Research 24, 1–35. URL: http://jmlr.org/
papers/v24/22-0606.html.
[90] Shida, Y., Jimbo, T., Odashima, T., Matsubara, T., 2024.
Rein-
forcement learning of multi-robot task allocation for multi-object
transportation with infeasible tasks. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2404.11817, arXiv:2404.11817.
[91] Silver, D., 2005. Cooperative pathfinding, in: Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital
Entertainment, pp. 117–122. doi:10.1609/aiide.v1i1.18726.
[92] Sorbelli, F.B., Carpin, S., Corò, F., Das, S.K., Navarra, A., Pinotti,
C.M., 2022. Speeding up routing schedules on aisle graphs with
single access. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 38, 433–447. doi:10.
1109/TRO.2021.3082021.
[93] Street, C., Lacerda, B., Mühlig, M., Hawes, N., 2024. Right place,
right time: Proactive multi-robot task allocation under spatiotempo-
ral uncertainty. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 79, 137–
171.
[94] Talvitie, E., 2017. Self-correcting models for model-based reinforce-
ment learning, in: Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press. p. 2597–2603.
[95] Testa, A., Notarstefano, G., 2022. Generalized assignment for multi-
robot systems via distributed branch-and-price. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics 38, 1990–2001. doi:10.1109/TRO.2021.3120046.
[96] Verma, A., Gautam, A., Singh Shekhawat, V., Mohan, S., 2024.
Dta-hmr-tt: Dynamic task allocation for a heterogeneous team of
mobile robots with task transfer. IEEE Access 12, 177050–177063.
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3505947.
[97] Vincent, J.A., Feldman, A.O., Schwager, M., 2024. Guarantees on
robot system performance using stochastic simulation rollouts. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics 40, 3984–4002.
doi:10.1109/TRO.2024.
3444070.
[98] Wang, J., Lian, Z., Liu, C., Liu, K., 2023.
Iterated clustering
optimization
of
the
split-delivery
vehicle
routing
problem
considering
passenger
walking
distance.
Transportation
Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 17, 100751. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590198222002123,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2022.100751.
[99] Wang, Z., Liu, C., Gombolay, M., 2022. Heterogeneous graph atten-
tion networks for scalable multi-robot scheduling with temporospa-
tial constraints. Auton. Robots 46, 249–268. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10514-021-09997-2, doi:10.1007/s10514-021-09997-2.
[100] Wei, C., Ji, Z., Cai, B., 2020.
Particle swarm optimization for
cooperative multi-robot task allocation: A multi-objective approach.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 2530–2537. doi:10.1109/
LRA.2020.2972894.
[101] WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology, 2026.
ATC Classification Index with DDDs, 2026.
https://atcddd.fhi.
no/atc_ddd_index_and_guidelines/atc_ddd_index/. Accessed: 2026-
06-26.
[102] Xidias, E., Zacharia, P., Nearchou, A., 2022.
Intelligent fleet
management of autonomous vehicles for city logistics.
Applied
Intelligence 52. doi:10.1007/s10489-022-03535-y.
[103] Xue, S., Shi, X., Chu, Z., Wang, Y., Hao, H., Zhou, F., Jiang, C.,
Pan, C., Zhang, J.Y., Wen, Q., Zhou, J., Mei, H., 2024. Easytpp:
Towards open benchmarking temporal point processes, in: Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08097.
[104] Xue, S., Shi, X., Hao, H., Ma, L., Zhang, J., Wang, S., Wang, S.,
2021.
A graph regularized point process model for event propa-
gation sequence, in: 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–7. doi:10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9533830.
[105] Yang, G., Li, J., Geng, Z., Luo, C., 2024. Quality-aware experience
exploitation in model-based reinforcement learning, in: 2024 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (BigData), pp. 1161–1166.
doi:10.1109/BigData62323.2024.10825395.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 32 of 33


Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Under Distribution Shifts
[106] Yang, I., 2021. Wasserstein distributionally robust stochastic con-
trol: A data-driven approach.
IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control 66, 3863–3870. doi:10.1109/TAC.2020.3030884.
[107] Yang, T., Feng, P., Guo, Q., Zhang, J., Ning, J., Wang, X., Mao,
Z., 2025. Autohma-llm: Efficient task coordination and execution
in heterogeneous multi-agent systems using hybrid large language
models.
IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and
Networking , 1–1doi:10.1109/TCCN.2025.3528892.
[108] Yu, T., Thomas, G., Yu, L., Ermon, S., Zou, J., Levine, S., Finn,
C., Ma, T., 2020. Mopo: model-based offline policy optimization,
in: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook,
NY, USA.
[109] Zhang, D., Dong, P., Peng, P., Dong, Y., 2025a. A graph reinforce-
ment learning framework for real-time distributed multi-robot task
allocation. Aerospace Systems , 1–12.
[110] Zhang, Q., Lipani, A., Kirnap, O., Yilmaz, E., 2020.
Self-
attentive Hawkes process, in: III, H.D., Singh, A. (Eds.), Proceed-
ings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
PMLR. pp. 11183–11193.
URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v119/zhang20q.html.
[111] Zhang, Y., Zhang, Z., Lim, A., Sim, M., 2021. Robust data-driven
vehicle routing with time windows. Operations Research 69, 469–
485.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2020.2043, doi:10.1287/
opre.2020.2043, arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2020.2043.
[112] Zhang, Y., Zhou, P., Zhang, R., Lu, S., Chai, T., 2025b.
Semi-supervised
concept
drift
detection
and
adaptation
based
on
conformal
martingale
framework.
Journal
of
Process
Control
147,
103374.
URL:
https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959152425000022,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprocont.2025.103374.
[113] Zhao, D., Yang, C., Zhang, T., Yang, J., Hiroshi, Y., 2022. A task
allocation approach of multi-heterogeneous robot system for elderly
care. Machines 10. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-1702/10/8/622,
doi:10.3390/machines10080622.
[114] Zheng, C., Li, L., Xu, F., Sun, F., Ding, M., 2005. Evolutionary route
planner for unmanned air vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Robotics
21, 609–620. doi:10.1109/TRO.2005.844684.
[115] Zuo, H., Cao, B., Zhao, Y., Shen, B., Zheng, W., Huang, Y., 2021.
High-capacity ride-sharing via shortest path clustering on large road
networks. J. Supercomput. 77, 4081–4106. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11227-020-03424-6, doi:10.1007/s11227-020-03424-6.
[116] Zuo, S., Jiang, H., Li, Z., Zhao, T., Zha, H., 2020.
Transformer
hawkes process, in: Proceedings of the 37th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, JMLR.org.
Daniel Garces is a Computer Science Ph.D. student
in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
at Harvard University, advised by Prof. Stephanie
Gil. His research focuses on the development of
model-based multi-agent reinforcement learning
algorithms for task allocation in real world appli-
cations. He is interested in adaptation mechanisms
and task allocation problems under uncertainty.
He received his Bachelor’s degree in Computer
Engineering from Columbia University in 2021.
Sara Castro, MD, MPH, is an OB/GYN resident in
the Harvard Mass General Brigham program. Her
work focuses on patient perspectives and prefer-
ences regarding the use of robotics and emerging
technologies in healthcare, with particular inter-
est in equity, communication, care navigation, and
language access. She earned her MPH in Health-
care Management, with a concentration in Public
Health Leadership, from the Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health and her MD from Harvard
Medical School. She also holds a BA in Medicine,
Literature, and Society from Columbia University.
Dr. Adrian Haimovich is an Assistant Professor of
Emergency Medicine at Harvard Medical School
and Director of the Division of Artificial Intelli-
gence in the Department of Emergency Medicine
at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston,
Massachusetts. His research is at the intersection
between emergency medicine and healthcare AI.
Dr. Byron Crowe is Chief Medical Officer at Doc-
tronic, where he leads clinical strategy and devel-
opment of its AI-native care model. He is also a
Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine at Stan-
ford, focused on improving complex systems at
scale. Previously, he served as CMO at Solera
Health and on the faculty of Harvard Medical
School, where he studied AI in clinical reasoning
and health policy. Named to Modern Healthcare’s
2024 “40 Under 40,” he earned his MD from
Emory and a master’s in clinical informatics man-
agement from Stanford, and is board-certified in
internal medicine and clinical informatics.
Stephanie Gil is an Assistant Professor in the
Computer Science Department at Harvard Univer-
sity’s School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
where she directs the Robotics, Embedded Auton-
omy, and Communication Theory (REACT) Lab.
Previously, she served as an Assistant Professor
at Arizona State University. Her research explores
multi-robot systems, focusing on how communi-
cation and information exchange impact resilience
and trusted coordination. She has received several
recognitions, including the NSF CAREER Award
(2019), ONR Young Investigator Program Award,
DARPA Young Faculty Award, and was named
2020 Alfred P. Sloan Fellow. Stephanie earned her
PhD from the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy in 2014.
D. Garces et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 33 of 33
