Title: Open Access proceedings Journal of Physics: Conference series

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.25373v1

Published Time: 2018-11-15T04:00:39.000Z

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
Designing Core Layer in Campus Network Using Software-Defined Networking 

Iwan Setiawan, Azis Wisnu Widhi Nugraha, and Sauqi Asrorul Zaza 

Department of Electrical Engineering, Universitas Jenderal Soedirman, Indonesia 

{stwn, azis.wwn}@unsoed.ac.id, sauqiasrorulzaza@gmail.com 

Abstract.  As one of the layers in campus network, core layer or backb one network should 

provide  inter connectivity  and routing  between internal and external networks, including other 

campus networks  or the Internet. With that requirement,  designing this layer to be highly 

available to  inter connect and route traffic  is a high priority.  By using software -defined 

networking (SDN) paradigm,  we attempt to design  core layer  in campus network  employing 

best practices  of  network  topology  and  routi ng  protocol  at the layer  with actual use case of a 

core layer in  a university’s  campus network.  We use RouteFlow  as  the SDN platform 

supporting traditional  routing  protocol, i.e. O pen Shortest Path First (O SPF ), over OpenFlow 

(OF)  network  infrastructure . The experi mental  testbed/ environment  consists of two virtual 

machines (VMs). The first VM is used as the SDN /O F data plane with  Open vSwitch in 

Mininet network emulator, and the second one representing SDN control plane comprising 

Route Flow  with  POX control ler . We  evaluate d the design  by testing  the interconnectivity  using 

ping for  the  OF switches  in the topology  and hosts  that are  conn ected to the  switches . We also 

tracked  the route of  the  packets  by monitoring traffic  passed  through  all network interfaces  of 

the switches  using t cpdump . This  case  was  evaluated since we need to make sure that packets 

are routed  with the best path  from source to destination  using OSPF  that was  implemented  in 

the  vi rtual network  at  the top of the SDN platform .

Keywords:  Core la yer in campus n etwork ; routing;  software -defined n etworking;  RouteFlow 

1.  Introduction 

A campus network is a network of interconnected local area networks (LANs) within an organisation or enterprise that spans inter-buildings in limited geographic areas. The common design for this network is hierarchical consisting of core, distribution, and access layers [1]. The core layer or backbone of campus network is used to interconnect internal to external networks, which are generally other campus networks or the Internet. The basic services needed for this network are interconnectivity and routing. That makes core layer essential to provide those services with availability in mind. 

In modern computer networks, there is a new paradigm for making these networks programmable, flexible, and manageable. The term is software-defined networking (SDN) that mainly separates control from data planes, and put the former plane into an external entity, i.e. SDN server or controller. In traditional networks, these planes are coupled in a network device. According to [2] there are more points to define SDN. These are forwarding decisions are flow-based instead of destination-based, and the network is programmable through applications running on the top of SDN controller. There are several solutions for making SDN available for the masses, network operators for campus networks in particular. These solutions could be developed purely SDN, bottom-up for all layers, or we could use platforms providing frameworks to ease SDN implementation with specific use cases. RouteFlow [3] is one the SDN platforms that provides a way to use traditional Internet Protocol (IP) routing over SDN/OpenFlow infrastructure. It is not just giving network operator opportunities to experiment with SDN infrastructure with traditional IP routing stacks on the top of it, but also a mean to connect to legacy networks and also to ease the migration to SDN. 

Related Works . Rizvi et al. [4] implemented and evaluated SDN based on RouteFlow in Internet Service Provider (ISP) networks using case study on multiple tests. Sudiyatmoko, Hertiana, and Negara [5] have done a research using RouteFlow with Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System (IS-IS) routing protocol evaluating Quality of Service (QoS) and controller performance for several network topologies. An SDN research using the platform also conducted by Negara and Tulloh [6] experimenting OSPF protocol implemented over the platform with QoS and convergence time parameters for different topologies. They did not designed their research to relate to campus network specifically core layer or backbone with its requirements such as network topology and routing protocol, also its actual use case in a real campus network. Moreover, the evaluation of how the packets were route from source to destination according to the routing protocols that were implemented on the top of SDN/RouteFlow were not carried out by the authors. 

Contributions . Our contribution in this paper is as follows. We design a core layer in campus network using SDN/OpenFlow based on RouteFlow with triangle for the network topology and OSPF protocol for the routing service. We consider the design with actual topology of a core layer in campus network in Universitas Jenderal Soedirman (Unsoed). Further, we conducted interconnectivity and packet routing tests to evaluate the proposed design. 

2. Research Method 

In this section, we describe the characteristics of the core layer in campus network and put them into requirements that are needed for the design of the layer using SDN/OpenFlow. After that, we propose the design in the form of network topology in a simple architecture of core layer and setup an experimental virtual testbed or environment. Ultimately, we run two tests to validate the design with interconnectivity and packet routing aspects. 

2.1. System Design 

2.1.1. Network Topology 

There are two choices for choosing network topology for the core layer, square or triangle topologies. It is considered optimum to use triangle topology, rather than the square one for  the  layer, si nce it 

gives equal -cost redundant paths for the best deterministic convergence [1]. In addition  to that , point -

to -point links between  network devices in the topology are  desired  to  take the benefits of  quick 

propagation when chang es happened in terms of li nk up  or  down. 

Unsoed has a campus network with hierarchical network design [7] including a core layer utilising triangle topology connecting three routers which are resided in three different locations: Duren Tiga, Grendeng, and Blater with link bandwidth of 1 Gbps. Figure 1 shows the hierarchical network design in the campus network with the core layer at the top of the architecture. This research where also meant to be an experiment to use SDN with the case study of the core layer at the university, in the hope that the results would give valuable information regarding architecture, requirements, and issues regarding implementation of traditional routing protocol especially OSPF in triangle topology on the top of SDN/OpenFlow infrastructure. 

2.1.2. Routing Protocol 

After the network topology is formed using triangle, the network devices will be connected to each other via the physical topology. Routing  service o n the network devices should compute and decide how packets will travel according the best path from source to destination. This service is usually applied  through  static or  dynamic routing . In the case of core layer, there are various IP routing 

protocols that can be used in the layer supporting dynamic routing , such as RIP, IS -IS, OSPF . The 

latter  protoco l is considered  eminent  compared to the others. It is  open and widely use  protocol  that 

has been  used in internal network  or intra -Autonom ous System (intra -AS) routing [8 ]. This link -state 

protocol  implement s Dijkstra’s  least -cost or shortest -path  (SPF) al gorithm.  It  is one  of  the protocol s

that has been standardized by Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)  [9 ]. The core layer in Unsoed’s 

campus network also uses this protocol  to dynamically rout e packets in the network. 

Figure 1. Hierarchical network design in a campus network. 

One of the challenges in designing a core layer using SDN is implementing traditional IP over SDN/OpenFlow infrastructure. Our goal of this research is how to apply traditional IP routing, i.e. OSPF, in core layer  over  SDN/OpenF low infrastructure. 

2.1.3. SDN for Core Layer 

OpenFlow (OF) [10] that is considered the origin of SDN, caters specifications needed for the communications between controller to switches or vise versa. It is called southbound communications with the use of Application Programming Interface (API). The goal of the project primarily to develop protocol for southbound communications and with that hopefully to seed the innovation through programmability developed at SDN application layer. This project intents to push this in campus networks since there are many opportunities to experiment the new technologies within this type of networks. RouteFlow [5] is one of the SDN platforms providing virtualised IP routing services over OpenFlow network infrastructure. It is consists of three core components, RFProxy, RFServer, and RFClient along with RF protocol to communicate the two latter elements. This platform uses an SDN/OpenFlow controller, either POX or Ryu. At the top of the platform, there is a virtual network that reproduces the interconnectivity of a physical or virtual infrastructure. The network could run legacy routing engines such as Quagga, BIRD, XORP. Thus, it will support many traditional IP routing protocols supported by those engines, e.g. RIP, IS-IS, OSPF, BGP. 

There are several options in choosing SDN controller with different features, code bases, and potentials for future research. In this research, we chose POX as the SDN controller since it is the base controller for experimenting with SDN particularly using Mininet, also it is included in RouteFlow package. Additionally, by choosing this controller, we hope that we just need to explore a small but functional controller program, considering the scope of this research. 

Summarising from the aforementioned requirements and considerations for the design, we put network components and preferences to Table 1. The design of the core layer using SDN/OpenFlow is shown in Figure 2, it is adapted from the traditional one on the left. RouteFlow with POX controller will be resided in the SDN Controller. With this information, we designed the experimental network through setup of softwares utilising virtualisation and other supporting ones. This will be described in the next section of the article. 

Table 1. Network components and preferences.     

> Network Component Preference
> Network topology Triangle with 1 Gbps links
> Routing protocol OSPF
> SDN RouteFlow with POX controller

Figure 2. A design of core layer using SDN/OpenFlow converted from the traditional one. 

2.2. Experimental Setup 

This experimental research uses a virtual testbed/environment consisting of two virtual machines (VMs) that run on a host, a laptop with specifications of Intel Core i5-6200U with 2 cores at base clock 2.3 GHz and main memory of 12GB. This laptop was installed with Debian GNU/Linux 9 (stretch) 64 bit. 

Table 2. Softwares and their functions for this research.                      

> Software Ver. Function Notes
> QEMU/KVM 2.8.1 Virtualisation For creating VMs, installed on host
> Dnsmasq 2.76 DHCP server Providing network config. for VMs, installed on host
> Wireshark 2.2.6 Network analysis For analysing data from tcpdump, installed on host
> RouteFlow CPqD SDN platform POX controller and RF*, installed in RouteFlow VM
> Open vSwitch 2.0.2 Data Plane Included in Mininet VM
> Tcpdump 4.9.0 Network monitoring Included in Mininet VM

Figure 3. The experimental setup of VMs along with the topology used in this research. 

Table 3. Network interface configurations for switches and hosts.                      

> Switch/Host Network Interface
> Ethernet 1 (e th 1)Ethernet (e th2 )Ethernet (e th3 )
> Switch 1 (s 1)172.31.1.1/24 10.0.0.1/24 20.0.0.1/24
> Switch 2 (s2) 172.31.2.1/24 20.0.0.2/24 30.0.0.2/24
> Switch 3 (s 3)172.31.3.1/24 10.0.0.3/24 30.0.0.3/24
> Host 1 (h 1)172.31.1.100/24 --
> Host 2 (h2) 172.31.2.100/24 --
> Host 3 (h3) 172.31.3.100/24 --

On the top of the host, we used several softwares for this research that can be shown in Table 2. Internet connection is also needed for setting up the experimental environment particularly when updating packages list and installing packages from repositories, also cloning RouteFlow repository and creating the virtual  routers including  all dependencies. 

We created an experimental setup to accomodate the design and include the softwares stated in Table 2 so that it forms an integrated virtual testbed/environment for this research. This setup can be seen in Figure 3. The network configuration for each network interface in OF switches and hosts is shown in Table 3. 

2.2.1. Host 

Our laptop host was installed with softwares required especially QEMU/KVM and dnsmasq. We installed QEMU/KVM, dnsmasq, and their dependencies, then we created scripts to run two  VMs  with 

hardware -support ed  virtualisation  for RouteFlow and Mininet  VMs  on host.  The specifications of the 

VMs can be described in  Table 4. 

It was also required to  configure two TUN interfaces  (virtual  network interface s) and one virtual 

bridge so that the two VMs connected to the host machine  via a virtual network . Option such as 

“m acaddr ” was included  for making  each VM  has differe nt MAC addreses for its network interface 

and did not  have  the same IP address . Internet connection was provided using  NAT  set on host. 

Table 4. Specifications for the VMs used in this research.         

> Specifications RouteFlow VM Mininet VM
> Virtual environment Dual-core, RAM 4GB, Disk 20GB Dual-core, RAM 3GB, Disk 20GB
> Operating System Ubuntu 12.04.5 64 bit Ubuntu 14.04.5 64 bit
> Function RouteFlow using POX controller Data Plane using OVS in Mininet

2.2.2. RouteFlow 

RouteFlow as the SDN platform we used in this experiment should be setup in certain steps. We used CPqD’s version of RouteFlow [11] since it is stable even though rather old than the community one. In general, the steps are preparing the system inside the RouteFlow VM including installing packages needed for compiling and running RouteFlow, downloading  source code of  CPqD’s  RouteF low ,

compiling  RFClient , configuring  three  virtual routers  for  Quagga  as well as  OSPF  forming triangle 

topology , and  finally  running  a script to generate  LXCs for  the  virtual  route rs.  The configuration for 

the latter includes a csv file defining how many LXCs are built , VM ID,  data path  ID , and port 

density .

In each of the virtual router’s LXC configuration, we set port density, MAC address, interface name, and link via virtual bridge. We have set the OSPF configuration to 1 second and 4 second for hello and dead intervals respectively plus configured networks for backbone area. Regarding the configuration of Quagga, we  define d interfaces  and  IP addresses for each of the  virtual rout er . After all 

steps are run successfully, we execute a script to run RouteFlow with POX controller including all 

softwares needed. 

2.2.3. Mininet 

Mininet [12] is a network emulator for experimenting SDN on a computer or laptop. This emulator includes controllers and data plane such as Open vSwitch (OVS). We use this emulator to simulate SDN data plane using OpenFlow switches based on Open vSwitch. 

Mininet provides VM image to be downloaded from the official repository. We used version 2.2.2 and OpenFlow 1.0 for this research. There is no installation of packages in the Mininet VM since it provides all packages needed. The details of the softwares which are included can be seen in Table 2. 

Within the Mininet as the  data plane  of our experiment , we need to create tri angle topology using 

Mininet API. Thus, we wrote a Python script consisting all needed configuration for creating this 

topology. The script will be run as a parameter of Mininet  binary  along with  passing  other  parameters 

such as defining custom topology,  remote controller  to RouteFlow VM , and  link bandwidth  set to 1 

Gbps . An additional  file  is needed to configure default route of networks where each host is 

connected. 3. Evaluation and Results 

We run the evaluation of the design according to the method aforementioned. Our aims for this evaluation are for testing the interconnectivity of network switches as well as hosts that are connected to each switch, also route tracing of packets from source to destination. We use ping program to send Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) packets from source to destination hosts and measure the round-trip time (RTT) for the interconnectivity and packets captured in all interfaces of the switches to obtain the routes. 

3.1. Interconnectivity 

Evaluation of the interconnection between network devices also a host connected to each device needs to be tested. As aforestated, w e use ping using combination  of  host pairs 10 times.  The combination 

are host 1 to host 2 ( h1 to h2 ), host 2 to host 3 ( h2 to h3 ), and  host 3 to host 1 ( h3 to h1 ). We also 

check  the captured data  from tcpdump  to  get the information of  OpenFlow  packet -in s and  -out s that 

encapsulate ICMP  packets  that pass through the switches . Table 5 shows the results of the 

interconnectivity test. 

Table 5. Results of interconnectivity evaluation of the design.                                                                       

> Test
> Link Test
> h1 to h2 h2 to h3 h3 to h1
> RTT OF Packet RTT OF Packet RTT OF Packet
> 131.5 Yes 46.4 Yes 39.4 Yes
> 271.8 Yes 25.8 Yes 54.2 Yes
> 331.9 Yes 28.1 Yes 46.8 Yes
> 472.4 Yes 42.5 Yes 55.0 Yes
> 562.4 Yes 18.7 Yes 26.9 Yes
> 638.4 Yes 41.8 Yes 154 Yes
> 734.4 Yes 12.2 Yes 40.9 Yes
> 849.4 Yes 34.4 Yes 54.7 Yes
> 971.9 Yes 45.3 Yes 126 Yes
> 10 33.7 Yes 110 Yes 51.7 Yes
> Avg. 49.841 40.644 65.129

We can see on Table 5 that the range of the average values is 40-65 ms. These results are considered normal, but if we consider the RTT values for LANs these are bigger. 

3.2. Packet Routing 

The second evaluation of  the design is packet routing. We need to make sure  that  ICMP  packets are 

sent from source to destination  fol low ing  the shortest/optimum path according to the OSPF protocol. 

Tcpdump was setup to monitor all of the interfaces on the switches. This can be seen on Figure 4. We use tcpdump since it is light, does not consume more resources, and is included in the Mininet VM. To start with the packet capturing, we need to remote access Mininet VM and start sessions for all switches and run tcpdump instances on them. Since the size of the storage inside VMs was limited, we transfered data generated by tcpdump to host. After that, we could analyse the data using Wireshark. Table 6 shows the results of packet route evaluation in this research. 

In the first test, we pinged from h 1 to h 2. It is  shown that the packets were sent  via  switch 1 ( s1) 

dan  switch 2 ( s2)  since this p ath is the shortest/best to connect the two hosts. The results are the same 

with ping tests from h2 to h3 and h3 to h1, packets were routed to the shortest path. The path was 

computed in virtual routers at the top of the RouteFlow platform using OSPF and  further  applied  the 

routing information into the SDN/OpenFlow data plane /infrastructure  in Mininet via RFProxy. Figure 4. Packet capturing with tcpdump on all switches’ interfaces. 

Table 6. Results of packet route evaluation of the design.   

> Test
> s1 s2 s3

s1-eth1  s1-eth2  s1-eth3  s2-eth1  s2-eth2  s2-eth3  s3-eth1  s3-eth2  s3-eth3 

h1-h2  1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0

h2-h3  0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1

h3-h1  1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0

4.  Conclusions  and Future Work 

We have designed a core layer or backbone in campus network using triangle topology, OSPF protocol, and SDN based on RouteFlow with virtual testbed/environment consisting of two VMs. The first VM running RouteFlow and POX controller plus supporting softwares, and the second one running Mininet with Open vSwitch. The two VMs simulate SDN control and data planes providing experimental testbed for the design. 

The design has been tested in terms of interconnectivity using ping with all network switches are interconnected and each host representing different network connected to each of the switches.  Pairs 

of hosts were pinged  resulting  range of  RTT  average  values of 40 -65 ms.  Packet ro uting was checked 

using t cpdump.  The tool  collected  network traffic  for all interfaces on the switche s,  and then  we 

analyse d the  data  with Wireshark  to fi nd the ICMP  packets that passed  through  the interfaces.  The 

result s are  correspond ed  with  SPF algorit hm implemented by OSPF protocol which is pac kets  are 

routed  to the shortest  path  from source to destination. 

We plan to develop scenarios with the same experimental setup to evaluate the design in terms of availability of the interconnectivity service against link failure in each possible link in the topology and measure the RTT plus convergence time between the failure and the converged network providing alternate paths. The results would be compared to the state-of-the-art with consideration of the complexity of the topologies. 

The implementation of this experimental research on a physical SDN testbed using OpenFlow switches with commodity hardware, e.g. OpenWrt-flashed low-cost switch, would be interesting to provide more real application of the design. The results of this research would give more valuable insights if we put them together with the results of the design in virtual SDN testbed side by side. 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank to the Institute of Information Technology and Systems Development (LPTSI) Unsoed for providing us the details of Unsoed’s campus network particularly its core layer through their staff in the Center of Infrastructure Development and Services. References 

[1] “Campus Network for High Availability Design Guide,” Cisco . [Online]. Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/solutions/Enterprise/Campus/HA_campus_DG/haca mpusdg.html. [Accessed: 07-Nov-2018]. 

[2] D. Kreutz, F. M. V. Ramos, P. Esteves Verissimo, C. Esteve Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky, and S. Uhlig, “Software-Defined Networking: A Comprehensive Survey,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–76, Jan. 2015. 

[3] RouteFlow, https://routeflow.github.io/RouteFlow/ 

[4] S. N. Rizvi, D. Raumer, F. Wohlfart, and G. Carle, “Towards carrier grade SDNs,” Computer Networks , vol. 92, pp. 218–226, Dec. 2015. 

[5] A. R. Sudiyatmoko, S. N. Hertiana, and R. M. Negara, “Analisis Performansi Perutingan Link State Menggunakan Algoritma Djikstra Pada Platform Software Defined Network (SDN),” 

Jurnal Infotel, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 40–46, 2016. 

[6] R. M. Negara and R. Tulloh, “Analisis Simulasi Penerapan Algoritma OSPF Menggunakan RouteFlow pada Jaringan Software Defined Network (SDN),” Jurnal Infotel , vol. 9, no. 1, 2017. 

[7] I. Setiawan, A. W. W. Nugraha, and A. S. Atmaja, “Unjuk Kerja IP PBX Asterisk dan FreeSWITCH pada Topologi Bertingkat di Jaringan Kampus,” Jurnal Infotel , vol. 9, no. 3, Aug. 2017. 

[8] J. F. Kurose and K. W. Ross, Computer Networking: A top-down approach , 7th ed., Pearson Education Limited, 2017. 

[9] OSPF Version 2, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2328 

[10] N. McKeown et al. , “OpenFlow: enabling innovation in campus networks,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , vol. 38, no. 2, p. 69, Mar. 2008. 

[11] RouteFlow, https://github.com/CPqD/RouteFlow 

[12] B. Lantz, B. Heller, and N. McKeown, “A network in a laptop: rapid prototyping for software-defined networks,” in Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks , p. 19, 2010.